NE-2732: Design proposal for Gateway API CRD management mode (#2023)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-management-mode.md

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Admin as Cluster Admin
    participant IC as Ingress (operator.openshift.io/v1)
    participant CIO as Cluster Ingress Operator
    participant CRDs as Gateway API CRDs
    participant GW as Gateway Stack<br/>(CIO Istio/GatewayClass/Gateway)

    Note over Admin,GW: Workflow: Mode Transition
    Admin->>IC: Set spec.gatewayAPI.crdManagementMode

    alt Managed (default)
        CIO->>CRDs: Install/upgrade CRDs + VAP
        CIO->>GW: Deploy CIO Istio, GatewayClass, Gateway
        CIO->>IC: Set status: Managed=True,<br/>Present=True, Compliant=True
    else Unmanaged
        CIO->>GW: Shutdown CIO Istio instance
        CIO->>CRDs: Remove VAP, stop managing
        Note over GW: GatewayClass/Gateway left for<br/>admin cleanup to avoid disruption
        CIO->>IC: Set status: Managed=False (Unmanaged),<br/>Present=observed
    else ExternalCRDs (unsupported)
        CIO->>CRDs: Remove VAP, stop managing
        CIO->>GW: Keep running
        CIO->>IC: Set status: Managed=False (ExternalCRDs),<br/>Present=observed, Compliant=observed,<br/>UNSUPPORTED
    end
```

### API Extensions

This enhancement introduces a **new CRD** in the

> `operator.openshift.io/v1` group. The new resource follows the

Reviewer: Just a note, net-new APIs must be introduced in the `v1alpha1` group so that we never accidentally ship them by default until the feature is GA.

Author: @Miciah you told me we could do v1 directly, so leaving the discussion here for you :) 

happy to update the EP with the conclusion

Reviewer: https://github.com/openshift/api#defining-new-apis

Author: sounds good! I will change here

	//
	// +required
	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=GatewayAPIManagementMode
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI"`
}

type IngressStatus struct {
	// Inline OperatorStatus for standard operator status fields
	// (conditions, version, observedGeneration, etc.)
	OperatorStatus `json:",inline"`

	// gatewayAPI holds status information for Gateway API
	// integration, including conditions related to CRD
	// management and the Gateway controller stack.
	//
	// +optional
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressStatus `json:"gatewayAPI,omitempty"`
}
```

The `GatewayAPIIngressConfig` and `GatewayAPIIngressStatus` types:

```go
// GatewayAPIManagementMode describes how the Cluster Ingress
// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Managed;Unmanaged;ControllersOnly
type GatewayAPIManagementMode string

const (
	// ManagedGatewayAPICRDs means CIO installs, owns, protects
	// (via VAP), and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs. CIO also
	// deploys the full Gateway controller stack (the Istio
	// instance deployed by CIO, GatewayClass, Gateway). This is
	// the default mode and the only fully supported configuration.

> 	ManagedGatewayAPICRDs GatewayAPIManagementMode = "Managed"

Reviewer: General convention is to use the pattern `{alias}{representation}`, so:

```suggestion
	GatewayAPIManagementModeManaged GatewayAPIManagementMode = "Managed"
```

	// UnmanagedGatewayAPICRDs means CIO does NOT install or
	// manage Gateway API CRDs and does NOT deploy the Gateway
	// controller stack. The customer or a third-party product is
	// responsible for bringing their own CRDs and Gateway
	// controller. CIO reports observational status only.
	UnmanagedGatewayAPICRDs GatewayAPIManagementMode = "Unmanaged"

	// ControllersOnlyGatewayAPICRDs means CIO does NOT manage
	// Gateway API CRDs but DOES deploy the OpenShift Gateway
	// controller stack (the Istio instance deployed by CIO,
	// GatewayClass, Gateway). The customer brings their own
	// CRDs. This is an UNSUPPORTED configuration useful for
	// development, testing, or advanced users.

> 	ControllersOnlyGatewayAPICRDs GatewayAPIManagementMode = "ControllersOnly"

Reviewer: If we are going to stick with allowing this mode to be configured, and it is truly an unsupported configuration, please make it abundantly clear by prefixing this mode with `Unsupported`.

It makes it abundantly clear to any future readers of the configuration that they are in an unsupported configuration mode and it makes users think twice because they have to type out the word `Unsupported` before flipping to that mode.

```suggestion
	GatewayAPIManagementModeUnsupportedControllersOnly GatewayAPIManagementMode = "UnsupportedControllersOnly"
```

// integration in the Cluster Ingress Operator.
type GatewayAPIIngressConfig struct {
	// crdManagementMode specifies how the Cluster Ingress
	// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions
	// (CRDs) and the associated Gateway controller stack.
	//
	// When set to "Managed" (the default), CIO installs, owns,
	// and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs, protects them with a
	// Validating Admission Policy, and deploys the full Gateway
	// controller stack (the Istio instance deployed by CIO,
	// GatewayClass, Gateway resources). This is the only fully
	// supported configuration.
	//
	// When set to "Unmanaged", CIO does not install or manage
	// Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the Gateway controller
	// stack. The cluster administrator or a third-party product
	// is responsible for providing their own CRDs and Gateway
	// controller. CIO reports observational status only.
	//
	// When set to "ExternalCRDs", CIO does not manage Gateway
	// API CRDs but does deploy the OpenShift Gateway controller
	// stack. The cluster administrator brings their own CRDs.
	// This is an unsupported configuration intended for

> 	// development and testing.

Reviewer: My understanding of the Gateway API is very rudimentary because that isn't my wheelhouse, but the scope of management that the field name implies and what these settings actually align with seems to be a bit at odds.

I wonder if a more generic `managementMode` is more appropriate here? something like:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  gatewayAPI:
    managementMode: Managed | Unmanaged | ControllersOnly
```
(naming is arbitrary here, feel free to use different mode names).

Author: no, I actually liked the proposal! Will change here, thanks!

> 	// development and testing.

Reviewer: I'm a bit hesitant to include this mode of operation. It isn't really clear to me what the use case for an end-user setting this mode would be such that they would get some kind of value out of it.

The only thing I can think of is to test if an existing version of the default OpenShift controllers can handle a changed API, but if we are documenting what the supported pairing is by shipping, testing, and vetting a fully-managed option I'm not sure why this would be something an end-user of OpenShift would care to put their cluster in an unsupported state for?

If you folks feel strongly that this should be an option for configuration, I'd prefer we make it abundantly clear via the enum value that this is unsupported with a naming pattern like `UnsupportedCRDsOnlyUnmanaged`

Author: this one is mostly about:
* layered products (MCP Gateway, RHOAI) wanting to test new CRDs with the current Istio version - eg.: some fields are promoted on a new version of Gateway API that we didn't vetted yet, and users want to test it
* users that previously deployed their CRD and are willing to upgrade and move toward ours but the process of upgrade means going through the upgrade path

btw on the original proposal from @knobunc this is exactly how it is worded and I am fine making the "Unsupported" word explicit part of the name:

```
[Possibly] No CRDs, but unsupported Gateway: If you install GWAPI and configure the OpenShift GatewayClass and Gateway, we would run our gateway, but this would be an unsupported configuration
```

	// * CRDsPresent - whether Gateway API CRDs exist on cluster
	// * CRDsCompliant - whether installed CRDs match expected version
	//
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=type
	// +optional
	Conditions []metav1.Condition `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}
```

The field paths are:

```
spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode
status.gatewayAPI.conditions
```

The following conditions are set within
`status.gatewayAPI.conditions`:

| Condition Type | Status | Reason | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `CRDsManaged` | `True` | `ManagedByCIO` | CIO is actively managing CRDs |
| `CRDsManaged` | `False` | `Unmanaged` | Administrator chose Unmanaged mode |
| `CRDsManaged` | `False` | `ControllersOnly` | Administrator chose ControllersOnly mode (unsupported) |
| `CRDsPresent` | `True` | `CRDsFound` | Gateway API CRDs are present on the cluster |
| `CRDsPresent` | `False` | `CRDsNotFound` | Gateway API CRDs are not present on the cluster |
| `CRDsCompliant` | `True` | `VersionMatch` | Installed CRDs match the expected version |
| `CRDsCompliant` | `False` | `VersionMismatch` | Installed CRDs do not match the expected version. Message includes the expected and actual versions. |

> | `CRDsCompliant` | `Unknown` | `NotApplicable` | Compliance check is not applicable (e.g., Unmanaged mode with no CRDs present) |

Reviewer: Just a note, it would be helpful to include this information in some form in the GoDoc for the conditions field of the status so that end-users can have this same information even when using something like `kubectl explain ...` to get the field documentation of the CR

   that will build on top of this work. This enhancement mentions it
   for context but does not define the solution. See
   [gateway-api#3624](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3624)
   for upstream tracking.
2. **CRD version ranges**: Allowing a configurable range of acceptable
   CRD versions rather than pinning to one specific version. This is
   future work that depends on resolving the unknown fields problem.
3. **Automatic migration of third-party CRDs**: When switching from
   `Unmanaged` to `Managed`, CIO will not attempt to reconcile or
   migrate third-party CRDs automatically. The administrator must
   ensure the cluster state is compatible before changing modes.
4. **MicroShift support**: MicroShift does not use CIO and has its own
   Gateway API design. This enhancement does not affect MicroShift.
5. **Istio CRD management mode**: This enhancement controls only
   Gateway API CRDs (`gateway.networking.k8s.io` group). Istio CRD
   management (the `networking.istio.io`, `security.istio.io`, etc.
   groups) is handled separately by the sail-operator library as
   described in
   [gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md).

## Proposal

> Add a new `gatewayAPI` struct field to the `IngressControllerSpec`

Reviewer 2: A better place for the `gatewayAPI` field would be `ingresses.config.openshift.io` or even a new `ingresses.operator.openshift.io` resource.  We previously proposed adding a `ingresses.operator.openshift.io` resource as a home for `OperatorLogLevel` in #1314.  Whether we can backport the addition of a new resource is an open question.

Author: I prefer going to what is less friction at this point. If adding a new resource and backporting is a huge friction, I would not do it. As this subject is already "hot" whatever we can make to get less friction I prefer :)

Reviewer 3: If we are going for least friction - should we do just do it as an annotation or magical GatewayClass name rather than putting it into an API that isn't quite right? :smile: Playing devils advocate

I wonder if we should have a hybrid approach. A "not so good way, but backports nicely" like tell users to create a "openshift-opt-out-crds" controller-name gatewayclass or an annotation on the the `ingresses.config.openshift.io` object (yea that's ugly I know). We'd start with and backport this solution.

Then a "proper api" for 5.0 moving forward: `ingress.operator.openshift.io`. We could delay that design for later, and possibly implement some migration logic, or at least a forced migration (`Upgradeable=false`) in 5.0 to make sure we can deprecate the "not so good way, but backports nicely".

Definitely more work for us, but does simplify the backporting.

Author: IIUC API reviewers are fine with us moving with a new API definition, I will go with this path

configuration is per-guest-cluster and does not affect the
management cluster or other guest clusters.

#### Standalone Clusters

This is the primary topology for this enhancement. All three modes
are fully applicable to standalone clusters with no special
considerations.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

**Single-node OpenShift (SNO)**: This enhancement applies to SNO
with no additional resource consumption concerns beyond what the
existing Gateway API feature already introduces. The `Unmanaged`
mode may be particularly useful for SNO deployments with constrained
resources, as it allows disabling the Gateway controller stack
entirely (the CIO-managed Istio instance, Envoy proxies) to reclaim
CPU and memory.

**MicroShift**: MicroShift does not use the Cluster Ingress Operator
and has its own Gateway API design (see the
[MicroShift Gateway API Support Enhancement](../microshift/gateway-api-support.md)).
This enhancement does not affect MicroShift.

#### OpenShift Kubernetes Engine

This enhancement is fully applicable to OKE. Since the
[gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md) enhancement
enables Gateway API on OKE by eliminating OSSM licensing concerns,

> all three CRD management modes are available on OKE clusters.

Reviewer 2: However, as noted in the "Backport to OCP 4.19" section, we might backport the API to versions of OKE that do rely on an OLM subscription for OSSM.

Author: but this is not a problem, right?

Reviewer 2: The fact that we install OSSM through an OLM subscription shouldn't be a problem.  My point is that "the
[gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md) enhancement enables Gateway API on OKE by eliminating OSSM licensing concerns" is not relevant when we backport this feature to OCP versions that still depend on OLM for the gateway controller.

Author: I see. Well, I will add some better wording here given we are again discussing about backporting noOLM

  (AWS, Azure, GCP, vSphere, Baremetal with IPv4/IPv6/Dual) -->

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Feature gate `GatewayAPICRDManagementMode` added to
  `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.
- `Managed` and `Unmanaged` modes fully functional.
- `ExternalCRDs` mode functional with unsupported warning.
- Status conditions implemented and observable.
- Unit and integration tests passing.
- Initial e2e tests for basic mode transitions.
- End user documentation for Tech Preview.

### Tech Preview -> GA

- All e2e test scenarios passing consistently (95%+ pass rate).
- Upgrade and downgrade testing with mode transitions validated.
- Mode transition edge cases tested (e.g., incompatible CRDs,
  missing CRDs).
- Telemetry for management mode implemented and reporting.
- Load testing with mode transitions under concurrent operations.
- User-facing documentation created in
  [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/).
- Feature gate promoted to `Default` feature set.
- Sufficient time for customer feedback (at least one minor
  release in Tech Preview).

### Backport to OCP 4.19

There is a desire to backport this feature all the way back to

> OpenShift OCP 4.19. The motivation is to allow customers who are

Reviewer 2: Or even OCP 4.18, which would enable a smooth upgrade from 4.18 to 4.19.

Author: can we go that back on an API backport?

   - `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True` (reason: `ManagedByCIO`)
   - `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`
   - `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`
5. External consumers observe the conditions and proceed normally.

#### Workflow 2: Switching to Unmanaged Mode

1. The cluster administrator decides to use a third-party Gateway
   API implementation.
2. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Unmanaged
   ```
3. CIO detects the mode change and begins transition:
   a. Stops the CIO-managed Istio instance.
   b. Removes the VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs.
   c. Does **not** remove the GatewayClass, Gateway resources, or
      Gateway API CRDs. Removing these resources could cause
      disruptions to existing workloads. The cluster administrator
      is responsible for cleaning up these resources if desired.
4. CIO sets the following conditions in `status.conditions`:
   - `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False` (reason: `Unmanaged`)
   - `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True/False` (observational)

>    - `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=Unknown` (not applicable in this mode)

Reviewer 3: *nit* Why exactly is it not applicable? Couldn't we still report whether the CRDs are compliant even though we are in `Unmanaged`?

It'd give the admin a early signal to understand if they are ready to go back to `Managed` (without having to push that button to get the `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` result). We do have the `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` logic written either way - might as well keep it running as a signal?

it also is a bit inconsistent with the go docs for `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant`
```
	//   - status: Unknown, reason: "NotApplicable" — compliance
	//     check is not applicable (e.g., Unmanaged mode with no
	//     CRDs present).
```

So should this also specify that it's `Unknown` only when there aren't CRDs, or is it always `Unknown` while in `Unmanaged`?

Author: I agree with you, good call. I think we should add the condition regardless of Unmanaged or Managed, to signal earlier that the admin can go back to Managed

	// +optional
	Status IngressStatus `json:"status"`
}

type IngressSpec struct {
	// Inline OperatorSpec for standard operator fields
	// (managementState, logLevel, etc.)
	OperatorSpec `json:",inline"`

	// gatewayAPI holds configuration for Gateway API
	// integration, including how the Cluster Ingress Operator
	// manages Gateway API CRDs and the Gateway controller stack.
	//
	// +required
	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=GatewayAPIManagementMode
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI"`
}

type IngressStatus struct {
	// Inline OperatorStatus for standard operator status fields
	// (conditions, version, observedGeneration, etc.).
	// conditions holds a list of conditions representing the
	// operator's current state. Gateway API CRD management
	// conditions are reported here with the "GatewayAPI" prefix:
	//
	// "GatewayAPICRDsManaged" indicates whether CIO is actively
	// managing Gateway API CRDs:
	//   - status: True, reason: "ManagedByCIO" — CIO is
	//     installing, protecting (via VAP), and upgrading CRDs.
	//   - status: False, reason: "Unmanaged" — the administrator
	//     chose Unmanaged mode; CIO does not manage CRDs or the

> 	//     Gateway controller stack.

Reviewer 3: *nit* just pointing out that `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` is a bit overloaded for describing these two things, but since they are always coupled, I don't think it's a big deal - we can decompose later if it's a problem. Just an FYI.

Author: yeah, I think the name is fine for now tbh. CRDsManaged is more like "are we managing them or not" so in the future we can have something like ControllersManaged, etc.

	//
	// "GatewayAPICRDsPresent" indicates whether Gateway API CRDs
	// exist on the cluster:
	//   - status: True, reason: "CRDsFound" — Gateway API CRDs
	//     are present on the cluster.
	//   - status: False, reason: "CRDsNotFound" — Gateway API
	//     CRDs are not present on the cluster.
	//
	// "GatewayAPICRDsCompliant" indicates whether the installed
	// CRDs match the version expected by this CIO release:
	//   - status: True, reason: "VersionMatch" — installed CRDs
	//     match the expected version.
	//   - status: False, reason: "VersionMismatch" — installed
	//     CRDs do not match the expected version. The message
	//     includes expected and actual versions and a pointer
	//     to where valid manifests can be obtained.
	//   - status: Unknown, reason: "NotApplicable" — compliance
	//     check is not applicable (e.g., Unmanaged mode with no
	//     CRDs present).
	OperatorStatus `json:",inline"`
}
```

The `GatewayAPIIngressConfig` type:

```go
// GatewayAPIManagementMode describes how the Cluster Ingress
// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions.
//
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Managed;Unmanaged
type GatewayAPIManagementMode string

const (

> 	// GatewayAPIManagementModeManaged means CIO installs, owns,

Reviewer 3: *nit* when you get to the api PR - I think we should spell out CIO, as ingress operator. I don't think we use CIO anywhere else in user facing docs.

Author: commented on https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/2890/changes#r3437544164

is it the case where the condition should also be like

```
 status: True, reason: "ManagedByIngressOperator"
``` 
instead of ManagedByCIO? ManagedByCIO is just to keep the consistency with noOLM: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/bf13f251347308b80b170582de455c59cb0510be/pkg/operator/controller/gatewayclass/status.go#L24

Reviewer 3: Oh yea good question - I'd spell it out just to be safe.

We are actually losing `ManagedByCIO` in https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/pull/1456 - the recent upstream changes to sail library collapses it into just a `Ready` state, so that might be a thing of the past.

```

### Common Issues

**Symptom**: `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=False` in `status.conditions`
after switching to `Managed` mode.

**Diagnosis**: The existing CRDs do not match the expected version.
Check the condition message for the expected and actual versions.

**Resolution**: Either upgrade the CRDs to the expected version or
remove them and let CIO reinstall them. Valid CRD manifests can be
obtained from the `gateway-api` container image in the OpenShift
release payload at `/manifests/gateway-api/`, or from the upstream
Gateway API release at
`https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases` matching
the expected version shown in the condition message.

```bash
# Check expected version from condition message
oc get ingress.operator.openshift.io cluster \
  -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions}' | \
  jq '.[] | select(.type=="GatewayAPICRDsCompliant")'

# Remove CRDs to let CIO reinstall (WARNING: this deletes
# all Gateway, HTTPRoute, and other Gateway API resources)
oc delete crd \
  gatewayclasses.gateway.networking.k8s.io \
  gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io \
  httproutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io \
  referencegrants.gateway.networking.k8s.io \

>   grpcroutes.gateway.networking.k8s.io

Reviewer 4: should we add the BTLS Policy CRD?

Author: we can. I wouldn't block the EP on the lack of it given APIs will always appear, but I would block the implementation!

Author: added as the part of my recent review

---
title: gateway-api-crd-management-mode
authors:
  - "@rikatz"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@gcs278"
  - "@everettraven"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers:
  - "@everettraven"
creation-date: 2026-05-26
last-updated: 2026-06-18
status: implementable
tracking-link:
  - https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/NE-2733
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md"
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md"
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-without-olm.md"
  - "/enhancements/ingress/add-dns-and-loadbalancer-conditions-to-managed-gateway.md"
---

# Gateway API CRD Management Mode

## Summary

This enhancement introduces a new cluster-scoped singleton API
resource, `Ingress` (resource `ingresses`, singleton named
`cluster`), in the `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` group. The
resource exposes a `spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode` enum
field that controls how the Cluster Ingress Operator (CIO)
manages Gateway API CRDs and the associated Gateway controller
stack (CIO-managed Istio, GatewayClass, Gateway). Two modes
are provided: `Managed` (default -- CIO owns everything) and

> `Unmanaged` (CIO stops managing, reports observational status only).

Reviewer 2: What is the "Gateway controller stack"?  You listed Istio (a controller) as well as GatewayClass and Gateway (two kinds).  Does this mean that the field controls both whether CIO manages Istio and whether CIO reconciles gatewayclass and gateway resources?  

Is there significance to the capitalization of "Gateway controller"?  Usually I write lower-case "gateway controller".

Author: this means that it disables the gatewayclass, gateway, gatewaylabeler and other controllers

The field lives on a new resource rather than on
`IngressController` (where multiple instances could conflict) or
`ingress.config.openshift.io/cluster` (which is owned by
`config-operator` for install-time configuration). The
`operator.openshift.io` group already has cluster-scoped
singletons (`DNS`, `Console`) and is the natural home for

> operator-managed behavior.

Reviewer 2: Maybe move the statements about IngressController and config-operator to the "Alternatives" section?  They are irrelevant and confusing to have in the summary.  I suppose the last sentence in this paragraph could be kept as justification for introducing a new resource instead of using `ingresses.config.openshift.io`.

Author: fully removed, I think the decision here doesn't matter much as its existence

annotations, and controller logs manually.

#### Story 3: Operational Monitoring

As a fleet administrator, I want to monitor Gateway API CRD ownership
state via standard OpenShift status conditions so that I can detect
clusters where CRD ownership is misconfigured or where CRDs have
drifted from the expected state.

### Goals

1. Provide a `managementMode` enum field on a new Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) singleton with two modes:
   `Managed` and `Unmanaged`.
2. Allow customers and third-party products to take full control of
   Gateway API CRDs without fighting CIO's reconciler or VAP.
3. Expose status conditions reporting CRD ownership mode, presence,
   and version compliance.
4. Preserve the current fully-managed behavior as the default,
   requiring no action from existing customers.
5. Define clear upgrade and downgrade semantics for mode transitions.

### Non-Goals

1. **Unknown field management**: Future work tracked upstream in
   [gateway-api#3624](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3624).
   This enhancement mentions it for context but does not define the
   solution.
2. **CRD version ranges**: Future work that depends on resolving

>    the unknown fields problem.

Reviewer 2: Does "CRD version ranges" mean supporting more than a single specific version of the Gateway API CRDs in a given OpenShift release?  Ultimately, that is the non-goal behind both of these non-goals, isn't it?

Author: I have removed both and just let it simple without much arguing

3. **Automatic migration of third-party CRDs**: When switching from
   `Unmanaged` to `Managed`, CIO will not migrate third-party CRDs.
   The administrator must ensure compatibility before changing modes.
4. **MicroShift support**: MicroShift does not use CIO and is
   unaffected by this enhancement.
5. **Istio CRD management**: This enhancement controls only Gateway
   API CRDs (`gateway.networking.k8s.io`). Istio CRDs are handled
   by the sail-operator library as described in
   [gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md).

## Proposal

Introduce a new cluster-scoped singleton API resource in the
`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` group:

- **Kind**: `Ingress`
- **Resource**: `ingresses`
- **Scope**: Cluster (non-namespaced)
- **Singleton name**: `cluster`
- **Pattern**: Same as `DNS` and `Console` in
  `operator.openshift.io/v1` -- embeds

>   `OperatorSpec`/`OperatorStatus` inline.

Reviewer 2: `Console` embeds `OperatorSpec`/`OperatorStatus`, but `DNS` does not.  Are you planning to implement the `managementState`, `logLevel`, `operatorLogLevel`, `unsupportedConfigOverrides`, and `observedConfig` fields of `OperatorSpec` as well as the various fields of `OperatorStatus`?

Author: yes, see future work. Also this was suggested by API reviewers.

Author: I may be mistaken,I was sure I saw this from some API review. Anyway, the OperatorStatus was mentioned as the common status somewhere, probably I got the spec together as "let's just make it a default API".

I am happy to drop the embed field if you feel so, just let me know. I hope this does not make us need another API review tho

Reviewer 2: I think we should check with the API reviewers to make sure we won't be obligated to implement these API fields.  `managementState` and `operatorLogLevel` would be nice to have.  However, I don't know whether having `observedConfig`, `logLevel`, or `unsupportedConfigOverrides` makes sense in this operator config given that this operator manages multiple heterogeneous operands.  I expect these would be forever dead fields.

Author: so, let's try to define a simpler approach. I would drop OperatorSpec fully, and OperatorStatus and add just Conditions and ObservedGeneration as defined on OperatorStatus, and in a future we decide to embed them I think it is not a breaking change 🤞

The spec contains a `gatewayAPI` struct with a
`managementMode` enum.

CIO watches this resource and reads
`spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode` to determine its behavior:

- **Managed** (default): CIO installs, protects (via VAP), and
  upgrades Gateway API CRDs. CIO runs the full Gateway controller
  stack (CIO-managed Istio, GatewayClass, Gateway). This is the
  current behavior and the only fully supported configuration.

- **Unmanaged**: CIO does not install CRDs and does not deploy
  the Gateway controller stack. The customer or a third-party
  product owns the CRDs and Gateway controller. CIO reports
  observational status only. This mode also serves as a signal
  to layered products that the installed CRDs may not be the
  ones supported by the OpenShift Gateway API implementation,
  and those products should adjust their behavior accordingly.

### Workflow Description

**Cluster administrator** is a human user responsible for managing
the OpenShift cluster and configuring ingress.

**CIO (Cluster Ingress Operator)** is the operator that reconciles

> IngressController resources and manages Gateway API components.

Reviewer 2: IngressController is irrelevant, and leading with it is confusing.  If your point is that CIO doesn't manage *only* things related to Gateway API, then you could write "resources for Gateway API as well as other ingress-related resources".

Author: changed to
"**CIO (Cluster Ingress Operator)** is the operator that reconciles
`ingresses.operator.openshift.io` resources and manages Gateway API components."

Reviewer 2: Ah, that is a helpful clarification — it makes me realize that you are saying that cluster-ingress-operator will now be updating the ingresses.operator.openshift.io/cluster resource status.

#### Workflow 1: Default Managed Mode (No Action Required)

1. The cluster administrator installs or upgrades OpenShift.
2. CIO reads the Ingress (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster`
   resource and observes that `spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode`
   is unset (defaults to `Managed`).

> 3. CIO deploys Gateway API CRDs, VAPs, the CIO-managed Istio

Reviewer 2: It's just one VAP, isn't it?
```suggestion
3. CIO deploys Gateway API CRDs, VAP, the CIO-managed Istio
```

Author: no, it is not. Today we deploy a single VAP to block, but you are forgetting we have VAP from Gateway API now to block upgrades, block moving to experimental as well.

Also, I prefer to keep the word on plural here and cover future cases, instead of make it singular and stick with a single use case

Reviewer 2: Why would we need the upstream VAP?  Does our downstream VAP allow anything that the upstream VAP blocks?  

Anyway, an EP is usually written in the context of the world as it exists when the EP is being written.  Writing "VAPs" seems a little confusing to me, but I'll defer to you if you prefer it that way.

Author: changed

   instance, GatewayClass, and Gateway resources as per the existing
   behavior.
4. CIO sets the following conditions in `status.conditions`:
   - `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True` (reason: `ManagedByIngressOperator`)
   - `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`
   - `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`
5. External consumers observe the conditions and proceed normally.

#### Workflow 2: Switching to Unmanaged Mode

1. The cluster administrator decides to use a third-party Gateway
   API implementation.
2. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Unmanaged
   ```
3. CIO detects the mode change and begins transition:

>    a. Stops the CIO-managed Istio instance.

Reviewer 2: This means the istiod and proxy pods get deleted, right?  Of critical importance, this means that setting `managementMode: Unmanaged` interrupts traffic for existing OpenShif-managed gateways.

Author: No, it deletes the Istio managed by sail-library but not the proxy. We do not touch existing gateways, or gateway resources. 

Similarly to OLM/noOLM migration

Reviewer 2: All right, that is an important clarification — setting `managementMode: Unmanaged` leaves any proxy pods around, in an unmanaged state.

   b. Removes the VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs.
   c. Does **not** remove the GatewayClass, Gateway resources, or
      Gateway API CRDs. Removing these resources could cause

>       disruptions to existing workloads. The cluster administrator

Reviewer 2: Stopping Istio would be disruptive, so I suppose you are referring to workloads involving third-party controllers, right?
```suggestion
      disruptions to existing workloads for gateways that are being
      managed by any third-party gateway controller. The cluster
      administrator
```

Author: added

      is responsible for cleaning up these resources if desired.
4. CIO sets the following conditions in `status.conditions`:
   - `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False` (reason: `Unmanaged`)
   - `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True/False` (observational)
   - `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True/False/Unknown` (whether the
     installed CRDs match the version expected by the ingress

>      operator; `Unknown` if no Gateway API CRDs are present)

Reviewer 2: Why "Unknown"?  If the CRDs are not installed, that is an observable fact.  I would expect `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` to be false if the CRDs that the platform usually installs are not all present.

Author: removed

5. The cluster administrator installs their third-party Gateway
   controller and optionally their own CRD version.
6. Layered products observe the `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False`
   condition with reason `Unmanaged` and treat this as a signal
   that the installed CRDs may not be the ones supported by the
   OpenShift Gateway API implementation. They should adjust their
   behavior accordingly (e.g., not relying on specific CRD

>    versions or fields).

Reviewer 2: What happens to DNSRecord resources and DNS records for existing gateways?

Author: nothing. We are disabling a controller, so we do not delete anything. It is up to the admin to remove it. Do you want me to add it somewhere?

Reviewer 3: Not just dnsrecords, there are other Istio-created resources (Service and Deployments) that become orphaned when the Istio control plane is stopped.

For DNSRecords specifically: we don't currently have workflows for admins manually deleting them, but I don't think we need to start. The DNSRecord already has an [OwnerReference on the Service](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller/gateway-service-dns/controller.go#L235-L240), so when the Service is GC'd, the DNSRecord goes with it. I think it's fine to leave this to normal GC as the deployment/service will likely need to be deleted to transition to a new controller.

Might be worth a call out the istio deployment/service and DNSRecord in the `#### Risk: Orphaned Resources During Mode Transition` section, and maybe add here a note that the user needs to clean up these during the transition. But more of a minor detail.

Author: discussing that with @Miciah , we need to document what "leaving a DNSRecord" behind means, like the owner must delete the GAteway, and this will cascade all way down to deleting a DNSRecord, and if the owner wants to keep the DNSRecord on cloud provider they should change the DNSRecord to unmanaged.

I will make this more clear than this comment, it is just because my memory fails me

   configuration.
2. The cluster administrator should ensure the existing Gateway API
   CRDs match the version CIO expects, or remove them entirely.
3. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Managed
   ```
4. CIO detects the mode change and begins transition.
   `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` remains `False` until CIO successfully
   takes ownership:
   a. If CRDs are absent, CIO installs them.
   b. If CRDs are present and match the expected version, CIO takes
      ownership (adds labels, deploys VAP) and sets
      `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True`.
   c. If CRDs are present but do not match the expected version, CIO
      sets `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=False` (in `status.conditions`)
      and does NOT overwrite them. `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` stays
      `False`. The administrator must resolve the mismatch before
      CIO can take ownership.
5. Once `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True`, `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`,
   and `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`, CIO starts the CIO-managed

>    Istio instance, GatewayClass, and Gateway resources. If any of

Reviewer 2: What does it mean to "start" the GatewayClass and Gateway resources?  Do you mean CIO starts reconciling them (adding the `istio.io/rev` label to gateways and creating dnsrecord resources for gateway listeners)?

Author: yes, I have changed to "associated CIO Gateway API controllers"

    participant Admin as Cluster Admin
    participant IC as Ingress (operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1)
    participant CIO as Cluster Ingress Operator
    participant CRDs as Gateway API CRDs
    participant GW as Gateway Stack<br/>(CIO Istio/GatewayClass/Gateway)

    Note over Admin,GW: Workflow: Mode Transition
    Admin->>IC: Set spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode

    alt Managed (default)
        CIO->>CRDs: Install/upgrade CRDs + VAP
        CIO->>GW: Deploy CIO Istio, GatewayClass, Gateway
        CIO->>IC: Set status.conditions: GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True,<br/>GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True, GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True
    else Unmanaged
        CIO->>GW: Stop CIO Istio instance
        CIO->>CRDs: Remove VAP, stop managing
        Note over GW: GatewayClass/Gateway left for<br/>admin cleanup to avoid disruption
        CIO->>IC: Set status.conditions: GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False (Unmanaged),<br/>GatewayAPICRDsPresent=observed, GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=observed
    end
```

### API Extensions

This enhancement introduces a **new CRD** in the
`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` group. The new resource follows the
same pattern as the existing `DNS` and `Console` cluster-scoped

> singletons in `operator.openshift.io/v1`.

Reviewer 2: It isn't clear what "the same pattern" means.  The dnses singleton is named "default", and the consoles singleton uses the `OperatorSpec` and `OperatorStatus` types; are we following those patterns?

Author: The singleton approach pattern. Pattern for me is "a similar approach" and not "exactly the same approach"

Reviewer 2: Thanks!  I understand now; "singleton pattern" is more explicit.

**Why a new resource** (see also Alternatives section):
`IngressController` is namespaced and multi-instance, so it
cannot hold a cluster-wide setting without conflicts.
`ingress.config.openshift.io` is owned by `config-operator` for
install-time configuration. A dedicated singleton in
`operator.openshift.io` follows the DNS/Console pattern and
provides a clean extension point.

The proposed Go types are in a new file in `operator/v1alpha1/` in
the `openshift/api` repository (e.g.,

> `types_ingress_gateway.go`):

Reviewer 2: Just use `types_ingress.go`, at least for the top-level `type Ingress { ... }` definition.  Using `types_<resource>.go` is the prevailing pattern.

If you are concerned that `types_ingress.go` could grow excessively large, it could make sense to put Gateway API-specific definitions in `types_ingress_gateway.go`, using `types_ingress.go` only for top-level definitions and generic operator configuration such as `logLevel`.  In the future, we could add `types_ingress_router.go` or whatever for OpenShift router-related configuration.

Author: this is a legacy text because the types_ingress.go was used for IngressController before. I have fixed it in https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/2892

```go
// +genclient
// +genclient:nonNamespaced
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
//
// Ingress contains configuration options specific to the Ingress Operator itself.
//
// Compatibility level 4: No compatibility is provided, the API
// can change at any point for any reason. These capabilities
// should not be used by applications needing long-term support.

> // +openshift:compatibility-gen:level=4

Reviewer 2: This is just for the alpha version — it would change from level 4 to level 1 when graduating from v1alpha1 to v1, right?

Author: yes I think so, Claude is following the guidelines of API design that are on this repo and given @everettraven accepted it I cannot see the current statement as an issue

Reviewer 2: `level=4` is appropriate to start with as you are introducing the API as v1alpha1; I just would like the EP to be explicit that we will be promoting the API to `level=1` as part of promoting it to v1.  

...But maybe it goes without saying?  I only see a few APIs that are v1 and not `level=1`, mostly legacy APIs.

Author: Right, as you mentioned above this is the current state for when the EP is written. Once we promote, I believe that the compatibility is also changed to level=1 (and I expect this to be gathered fast by API review, claude finding inconsistencies between this and the Compatibility Level comment above, etc).

Reviewer: AFAIK the compatibility level is automatically generated based on versioning of the API unless explicitly overridden.

The only times I've seen this compatibility level be different for a "v1" API is one that is actually representative of a configuration file that cannot be created by an end-user in any supported way.

// +openshift:api-approved.openshift.io=<TBD>

> // +openshift:file-pattern=cvoRunLevel=0000_50,operatorName=ingress,operatorOrdering=02

Reviewer 2: What is the significance of `operatorOrdering=02`?

Author: generates the file as 0000_50_ingress_02_ingresses.crd.yaml

probably Claude doing its assertion found that we already have ingress on the other API. Anyway this has no impact on the EP

Reviewer 2: The other ingress API is `0000_10_config-operator_01_ingresses-Default.crd.yaml` — that is, `cvoRunLevel=0000_10,operatorName=config-operator,operatorOrdering=01`.  But I am fine with working out the details later should they change — we can update the EP as needed.

Author: thanks, gonna keep as is for now

// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:resource:path=ingresses,scope=Cluster
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status
// +openshift:capability=Ingress
type Ingress struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// metadata is the standard object's metadata.
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	// spec holds user settable values for configuration.
	// +required
	Spec IngressSpec `json:"spec"`

	// status holds observed values from the cluster.
	// +optional
	Status IngressStatus `json:"status"`
}

type IngressSpec struct {
	// Inline OperatorSpec for standard operator fields
	// (managementState, logLevel, etc.)

> 	OperatorSpec `json:",inline"`

Reviewer 2: Will we be implementing these fields?

Author: we can, as I mentioned above this came from some comment somewhere about using the common fields for OperatorStatus, and I brough the OperatorSpec together.

I can remove it, but I think we should aim to have OperatorSpec as a "gain" of this EP

Author: waiting API reviewers (@JoelSpeed and @everettraven ) to tell me if we can drop this and OperatorStatus and stick with simple Conditions and ObservedGeneration for now

	// gatewayAPI holds configuration for Gateway API
	// integration, including how the Cluster Ingress Operator
	// manages Gateway API CRDs and the Gateway controller stack.
	//
	// +required
	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=GatewayAPIManagementMode
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI"`
}

type IngressStatus struct {
	// Inline OperatorStatus for standard operator status fields
	// (conditions, version, observedGeneration, etc.).
	// conditions holds a list of conditions representing the
	// operator's current state. Gateway API CRD management
	// conditions are reported here with the "GatewayAPI" prefix:
	//
	// "GatewayAPICRDsManaged" indicates whether the ingress operator is
	// actively managing Gateway API CRDs:
	//   - status: True, reason: "ManagedByIngressOperator" — the
	//     ingress operator is installing, protecting (via VAP), and
	//     upgrading CRDs.
	//   - status: False, reason: "Unmanaged" — the administrator
	//     chose Unmanaged mode; the ingress operator does not manage

> 	//     CRDs or the Gateway controller stack.

Reviewer 2: The operator also reports "False" in case of a conflict, right?
```suggestion
	//   - status: False, reason: "Unmanaged" — the administrator
	//     chose Unmanaged mode, or a conflict prevents the ingress
	//     operator from taking control of the CRDs; the ingress
	//     operator does not manage CRDs or enable the OpenShift
	//     gateway controller.
```

Author: right

)

// GatewayAPIIngressConfig holds configuration for Gateway API
// integration in the Cluster Ingress Operator.
type GatewayAPIIngressConfig struct {
	// managementMode specifies how the Cluster Ingress
	// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions
	// (CRDs) and the associated Gateway controller stack.
	//
	// When set to "Managed" (the default), the ingress operator
	// installs, owns, and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs, protects
	// them with a Validating Admission Policy, and deploys the
	// full Gateway controller stack (the Istio instance deployed
	// by the ingress operator, GatewayClass, Gateway resources).
	// This is the only fully supported configuration.
	//
	// When set to "Unmanaged", the ingress operator does not
	// install or manage Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the
	// Gateway controller stack. The cluster administrator or a
	// third-party product is responsible for providing their own
	// CRDs and Gateway controller. The ingress operator reports
	// observational status only. This mode also serves as a signal
	// to layered products that the installed CRDs may not be the

> 	// ones supported by the OpenShift Gateway API implementation.

Reviewer 2: Using `spec` to infer the status of the installed CRDs is unreliable.  Better to note here that controllers that need that information should refer to status instead.  And this should be a separate paragraph as it isn't specific to the "Unmanaged" value.

Author: simplified to 
"	// When set to "Unmanaged", the ingress operator does not
	// install or manage Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the
	// Gateway controller stack. The cluster administrator or a
	// third-party product is responsible for providing their own
	// CRDs and Gateway controller."

and removed the rest of comments about layered products, it is useless to have it on godoc.

Reviewer 2: I think that explicitly documenting how consumers are expected to determine "that the installed CRDs may not be the ones supported by the OpenShift Gateway API implementation" is useful.  However, I guess you are saying that the godoc for the status conditions is sufficient, and mentioning that consumers should use `status` for this purpose in the godoc for `spec` would be redundant?  Anyway, better to say nothing here than to say something misleading, so I am happy enough that the misleading statement has been removed.

Author: yes, that's right, I am saying that status should be enough to assert it, and in fact the status definition follows the spec definition on the EP

	//
	// +kubebuilder:default:="Managed"
	// +default="Managed"
	// +required
	ManagementMode GatewayAPIManagementMode `json:"managementMode"`
}
```

The field paths are:

```
spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode
status.conditions
```

The following Gateway API conditions are set within
`status.conditions` (inherited from `OperatorStatus`):

| Condition Type | Status | Reason | Description |
|---|---|---|---|
| `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` | `True` | `ManagedByIngressOperator` | Ingress operator is actively managing CRDs |

> | `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` | `False` | `Unmanaged` | Administrator chose Unmanaged mode |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` | `False` | `Unmanaged` | Administrator chose Unmanaged mode and CIO has taken ownership of the CRDs |
```

Author: this is wrong. GatewayAPICRDsManaged = false does not mean CIO has taken ownership of CRDs. Anyway, this is updated for a better wording on the current EP

| `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` | `True` | `VersionMatch` | Installed CRDs match the expected version |
| `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` | `False` | `VersionMismatch` | Installed CRDs do not match the expected version. Message includes the expected and actual versions. |
| `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` | `Unknown` | `Unknown` | Compliance check is not applicable (e.g., no Gateway API CRDs are present on the cluster) |

**API versioning note:** As a net-new API, this resource is
introduced at `v1alpha1` (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`). It
will be promoted to `operator.openshift.io/v1` once the feature
reaches GA and graduates from the feature gate.

**Note:** This is a new CRD and must go through the full API
review process via `#forum-api-review`. The API approver must
review both this enhancement and the implementation PR in
`openshift/api`.

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

Same semantics as standalone clusters. The Ingress Operator runs
on the management cluster but manages resources on the guest
cluster. The mode is configured per-guest-cluster and does not

> affect the management cluster.

Reviewer 2: Are there any complications with adding a new CRD in HyperShift?  We have run into problems in the past with RBAC resources because of the way HyperShift manages resources that CVO manages on standalone clusters.  I expect we will have similar RBAC issues with the new config resource, and I can imagine we might have additional issues with the installation of the CRD itself.

Author: IMO this is implementation details and not part of the EP. We have fixed this on the noOLM by adding proper annotations and merging it first, we should follow a similar approach but it does not belong to the EP

Reviewer 2: Addressing HyperShift's special needs around CRD and RBAC updates seems to me like the sort of thing that needs to be documented somewhere, _especially_ given that it has been a recurring issue and cause of delay for getting features merged.  

Bottom line:  I don't want us to get bitten _yet again_ by HyperShift's peculiarities.  

Are you suggesting that these special needs are more a part of the development process or the process of getting code merged, rather than part of the design itself?  Maybe it needs to be documented somewhere other than the EP — in some agentic documentation, for example.

Author: yes I agree. Do you have some more details on this past problem that we had with hypershift? Maybe I can add it here, but honestly I think it would be something we would get even on hypershift pipelines (I hope!)

Reviewer: You should explicitly document any specific design considerations you have to make specifically for hypershift and get them review by a hypershift SME as part of the EP process.

Reviewer 5: I took a look at the EP and it seems straightforward from the point of view of hypershift. I checked a 4.22 hostedcluster and it looks like the CIO is already managing the gateway API on it by default. 

It may be worth mentioning that the new CR would be created in the hosted cluster's kube API and would be managed entirely by the owner/admin of the hosted cluster. In other words, because this is strictly dealing with the data plane of the hosted cluster there should be no knobs exposed on the provider side (HostedCluster CRD). An admin of a hosted cluster should be able to enable/disable CRD management by modifying the new ingress CR.

Reviewer 2: One recent issue that comes to mind with HyperShift is [OCPBUGS-78539](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/OCPBUGS-78539) where we had added some controller logic to manage networkpolicies, and we had added the necessary RBAC to allow the operator to manage networkpolicies, but we got failures on HyperShift during upgrades because HyperShift doesn't apply CVO manifests in the expected order — HyperShift would update the operator deployment to run the new logic before updating the RBAC to grant the operator the new permissions.  

Another issue is [OCPBUGS-32373](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/OCPBUGS-32373) where similarly we added some controller logic to check featuregates and added the necessary RBAC, but we got failures on HyperShift because of the same out-of-order manifest updates.  

Now we are adding a new ingresses.operator.openshift.io resource, which will need new permission for the operator to read the resource and write its status, and I expect we will have the same issue with this resource that we had with the featuregates and networkpolicies resources.  

Maybe this EP isn't the right place to address the issue, and we can follow up elsewhere, but we should try to get ahead of the issue one way or another.  And maybe thinking about this issue will lead us to think about other common pitfalls or potential issues with HyperShift.

Author: I think this actually goes not to the EP per se, but to the "shared context" and "shared knowledge" we need to give to our AI tooling.

#### Standalone Clusters

Primary topology. Both modes apply with no special considerations.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

**SNO**: No additional resource concerns. `Unmanaged` mode allows
disabling the Gateway controller stack to reclaim resources.

**MicroShift**: Not affected. MicroShift does not use CIO (see

> [MicroShift Gateway API Support](../microshift/gateway-api-support.md)).

Reviewer 2: Will MicroShift install the new ingresses config CRD at all?

Author: I don't have an answer for this, but I imagine that it will follow the same pattern of other CRDs used by CIO

Reviewer 2: As far as I know, it has been less a pattern and more an _ad hoc_ process.  

Thinking this through, it doesn't make sense on the face of it to install the _ingress operator_ CRD on MicroShift, given that MicroShift doesn't run _the ingress operator_.  Nothing in this new CRD makes sense unless you have the ingress operator running to consume `spec` and publish `status`.  

The only reason I can think of why it might be useful to have the CRD would be if MicroShift itself published some status in it for compatibility with consumers that check it to determine whether they can rely on the installed Gateway API CRDs.  However, in the context of MicroShift, it isn't clear what `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True` really means — "the installed CRDs match the version expected by this ingress operator release" is meaningless if there is no ingress operator.  Moreover, presumably "this ingress operator release" is really referring to the OpenShift release, which is again meaningless in the MicroShift context.  

So I think it is reasonable to say that the ingress operator CRD is useless for MicroShift and should not be installed there.

Author: complemented here with a word that the CRD should not be installed on it

#### OpenShift Kubernetes Engine

Both modes are available on OKE. However, Gateway API support on
OKE depends on the
[gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md) enhancement
which eliminates OSSM licensing concerns. Given the desire to
backport this management mode feature to OCP 4.18, OKE enablement
depends on whether `gateway-api-without-olm` is also backported
to the same version. If that enhancement is not backported, OKE
support for this feature is limited to the OCP version where
`gateway-api-without-olm` is first available.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Feature Gate

New feature gate: `GatewayAPIManagementMode`, added to
`TechPreviewNoUpgrade` in
[features.go](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/features/features.go).

The `gatewayAPI` field uses the
`+openshift:enable:FeatureGate=GatewayAPIManagementMode` marker
so it only appears in CRDs when the gate is enabled.

#### Interaction with the GatewayAPI Feature Gate

The `managementMode` field only takes effect when the existing
`GatewayAPI` feature gate is also enabled. When `GatewayAPI` is
disabled, CIO does not manage any Gateway API resources regardless

> of the mode setting.

Reviewer 2: Note that we removed the "GatewayAPI" featuregate in OpenShift 4.22.  That makes this paragraph a bit confusing.  It might also complicate backports a bit, but it shouldn't cause any major issues — or could it?

Author: but we are backporting, so the case here is not about 4.22, but when we are doing the backports, this field should be used just when Gateway API is enabled, right?

Reviewer 2: Right, that makes sense.  It was just confusing to have references to a featuregate that had been removed.

I see you updated the EP to explain that the featuregate has been removed, so the contemporary reader won't see "`GatewayAPI` feature gate", look for it in https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/features/features.go, and get confused because the featuregate doesn't exist there.  And you explain now that the featuregate exists in earlier versions to which this enhancement may be backported, so the reader should understand why you are referring to this thing that has already been removed.  That should be sufficient clarification.

#### CIO Controller Changes

Affected controllers:

| Controller | Managed | Unmanaged |
|---|---|---|
| CRD management | Install, upgrade, protect (VAP) | Observe only |
| GatewayClass | Active | Disabled |
| Gateway | Active | Disabled |

> | Status | Report conditions | Report conditions |

Reviewer 2: Ah, are the "GatewayClass" and "Gateway" controllers what you are referring to in "Gateway controller stack (CIO-managed Istio, GatewayClass, Gateway)" earlier in the EP?  

What exactly are these controllers?  Cluster-ingress-operator has these controllers:

- gateway-labeler
- gateway-service-dns
- gateway-status — is this what you are referring to as "Status" in this table?
- gatewayapi — the "CRD management" controller, I presume.  
- gatewayclass — I guess this is the "GatewayClass" controller?

All of these controllers would be inactive for "Unmanaged" mode, right?  

Istio also has several controllers related to Gateway API (and all of these controllers would likewise be inactive for "Unmanaged" mode, since CIO stops Istio entirely in "Unmanaged" mode), but given the section name ("CIO Controller Changes"), I assume that this table is referring only to controllers that are part of CIO itself.  

The table is really confusing.  Any reason not to state simply that all of CIO's controllers related to Gateway API are deactivated in "Unmanaged" mode?

Author: removed

#### Gateway Controller Stack Start Condition

> CIO starts the CIO-managed Istio instance, GatewayClass, and Gateway

Reviewer 2: Again, "starts the [...] GatewayClass, and Gateway resources" doesn't make sense.

Author: fixed

in `status.conditions`:

- `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True`
- `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`
- `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`

If any of these conditions is not `True` (e.g., during a transition
back to `Managed` where CRDs are non-compliant, or while CIO is
installing CRDs), the Gateway controller stack is not started. This
is not a degraded state: these conditions do not contribute to the
operator's `Degraded` status condition and do not block cluster
upgrades. They are informational signals about Gateway API CRD
readiness.

#### VAP Management

The VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs is deployed only in `Managed`
mode. When transitioning away from `Managed`, the VAP must be
removed first to avoid leaving CRDs locked.

#### CRD Validity Definition

A Gateway API CRD is considered **compliant** when:

1. **Strict version match**: The CRD's
   `gateway.networking.k8s.io/bundle-version` annotation matches
   the exact Gateway API version that CIO expects (e.g.,
   `v1.2.1`). Version ranges are not supported (see Non-Goals).

2. **Checksum verification** (future iteration): SHA-256 checksum
   of the CRD's OpenAPI schema compared against the expected

>    checksum embedded in the CIO binary.

Reviewer 2: Previously, we implemented the schema check using [`"k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/equality".Semantic.DeepEqual`](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/fa958db6ac41da40aa032efa02cd4bb7365e59b9/pkg/operator/controller/status/controller.go#L445).  Why complicate the logic with a checksum?

Author: moved to use Semantic.DeepEqual

When CRDs are non-compliant, CIO reports the mismatch in the
`GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` condition message, including expected vs. actual
versions and where to obtain valid manifests. Valid CRD manifests
are available from:
- The `gateway-api` container image in the OpenShift release

>   payload at `/manifests/gateway-api/`.

Reviewer 2: This is a little messy to use, but it is nicely self-contained.  We just need to provide the Shell command to extract these manifests.

Author: yes, and we need to modify the Dockerfile to start adding these manifests to the image as well.

   controller and optionally their own CRD version.
6. Layered products observe the `CRDsManaged=False` condition with
   reason `Unmanaged` and treat this as a signal that the installed
   CRDs may not be the ones supported by the OpenShift Gateway API
   implementation. They should adjust their behavior accordingly
   (e.g., not relying on specific CRD versions or fields).

#### Workflow 3: Returning to Managed Mode

1. The cluster administrator wants to return to the fully managed
   configuration.
2. The cluster administrator ensures the existing Gateway API CRDs
   match the version CIO expects, or removes them entirely.
3. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Managed
   ```
4. CIO detects the mode change:
   a. If CRDs are absent, CIO installs them.
   b. If CRDs are present and match the expected version, CIO takes
      ownership (adds labels, deploys VAP).
   c. If CRDs are present but do not match the expected version, CIO

>       sets `CRDsCompliant=False` (in `status.gatewayAPI.conditions`)

Reviewer 3: Would CIO set `CRDsManaged` to `False` or `True` in this case? The CRDs aren't compliant, so CIO isn't actually managing them — but it *wants* to manage them. I'd lean toward `False` since this is status, not intent, right?
 
More importantly, will CIO actually run the Gateway API controller logic (install OSSM) while CRDs are non-compliant upon returning to `Managed`? I could see arguments for both:
> 
**Run the OpenShift Gateway controller with non-compliant CRDs**: This would let users with third-party or newer CRDs ease their way back into the managed Gateway API controller — they could test OpenShift Gateway alongside their existing setup before fully transitioning.
 
**Refuse to start the Gateway controller while CRDs are non-compliant**: Probably the safer move, given the risks of Istio reconciling fields based on CRD schema presence.

I think this should be covered in the EP somewhere either way.

Reviewer 3: And lastly, should we go `degraded=true` or `upgradeable=false` when `CRDsCompliant=false` and we are trying to manage them?

Author: I don't think we should block upgrades, but I think that when CRDsCompliant=false we should also not Manage them, and add a status condition reason on why.

For the former question, I think the CRDsManaged should be False, and for now given this is unsupported and we have discussed this formerly on this EP, it is either "Managed = all in, Unmanaged = nothing" (we have dropped actually the UnsupportedControllerOnly knob that was originally proposed).

Maybe we can soften this restriction later, but I would prefer to start strict and soft, than start soft and figure out things will break

        Note over GW: GatewayClass/Gateway left for<br/>admin cleanup to avoid disruption
        CIO->>IC: Set status: Managed=False (Unmanaged),<br/>Present=observed
    end
```

### API Extensions

This enhancement introduces a **new CRD** in the
`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` group. The new resource follows the
same pattern as the existing `DNS` and `Console` cluster-scoped
singletons in `operator.openshift.io/v1`.

**Why a new resource** (see also Alternatives section):
`IngressController` is namespaced and multi-instance, so it
cannot hold a cluster-wide setting without conflicts.
`ingress.config.openshift.io` is owned by `config-operator` for
install-time configuration. A dedicated singleton in
`operator.openshift.io` follows the DNS/Console pattern and
provides a clean extension point.

The proposed Go types are in a new file in `operator/v1alpha1/` in
the `openshift/api` repository (e.g.,
`types_ingress_gateway.go`):

```go
// +genclient
// +genclient:nonNamespaced
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
//
// Ingress holds cluster-wide configuration for Gateway API
// integration managed by the Cluster Ingress Operator. The

> // canonical name is `cluster`.

Reviewer 3: *nit* we can take this up in the API PR - but it does more than `holds cluster-wide configuration for Gateway API integration`. I think we'd want to reword that to be generic operator configuration (i.e. we might want to add https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1314).

Author: good call, I have asked claude when writing to make it generic and missed this description. I will take the original proposal from logLevel EP

	// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions
	// (CRDs) and the associated Gateway controller stack.
	//
	// When set to "Managed" (the default), CIO installs, owns,
	// and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs, protects them with a
	// Validating Admission Policy, and deploys the full Gateway
	// controller stack (the Istio instance deployed by CIO,
	// GatewayClass, Gateway resources). This is the only fully
	// supported configuration.
	//
	// When set to "Unmanaged", CIO does not install or manage
	// Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the Gateway controller
	// stack. The cluster administrator or a third-party product
	// is responsible for providing their own CRDs and Gateway
	// controller. CIO reports observational status only. This
	// mode also serves as a signal to layered products that the
	// installed CRDs may not be the ones supported by the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation.
	//
	// +kubebuilder:default:="Managed"
	// +default="Managed"
	// +required
	ManagementMode GatewayAPIManagementMode `json:"managementMode"`
}

// GatewayAPIIngressStatus holds status information for Gateway
// API integration managed by the Cluster Ingress Operator.

> type GatewayAPIIngressStatus struct {

Reviewer: Do we suspect that this Gateway API specific status blob is going to need to contain more than standard status conditions in the near future?

If not, it might be worth it to drop this in favor of the standard operator conditions, just prefixed with `GatewayAPI` (i.e `GatewayAPICRDsManaged`)

Author: yes, I am considering that for instance, we can extend this API in the future like:
* Do OSSM update per patch or minor release (there is an ongoing effort for it) so we will reproduce what version is being configured on status
* Allow cluster admin to pre-define GatewayClasses configurations, we may want to define if these classes were accepted and configured, mismatched, etc per class

Author: (or even non-gateway api CIO configuration as well)

Switching to `Unmanaged` leaves GatewayClass, Gateway, and
HTTPRoute resources without a managing controller.

**Mitigation**: CIO preserves all Gateway API resources during
transitions to avoid disruption. The administrator is responsible
for cleanup. Documentation must state this clearly.

#### Risk: Incompatible Mode Transition

Switching to `Managed` may fail if existing CRDs do not match the
expected version.

**Mitigation**: CIO verifies CRD compliance before taking
ownership. If incompatible, CIO sets `CRDsCompliant=False` and
does not overwrite. The administrator must resolve the mismatch.

#### Risk: Security Implications of Removing VAP

In non-`Managed` modes, the VAP is removed, allowing any actor
with CRD RBAC to modify Gateway API CRDs.

**Mitigation**: Explicit trade-off. Standard Kubernetes RBAC still
applies. Documentation must state that VAP protection is removed.

### Drawbacks

Increased CIO complexity: two behavioral modes with different
controller enable/disable states and mode transition logic. This is
justified by customer demand -- the alternative is customers
fighting the VAP and CRD reconciler.

## Open Questions

> 1. **CRD cleanup on Unmanaged transition**: Should CIO offer an

Reviewer 3: AKA self destruct button 😸 I vote no.

Author: lol I vote no as well, I will remove this open question actually

   option to remove CRDs when transitioning to `Unmanaged`? This
   would delete all Gateway/HTTPRoute resources. The current
   proposal preserves CRDs during transitions.

> 2. **Interaction with `unsupportedConfigOverrides`**: The CRD

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what this is referring to, something in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md? I don't see that have any `unsupportedConfigOverrides` for CRD management yet.

Author: indeed, removing

   lifecycle management enhancement uses an "unsupported config
   override" mechanism to bypass CRD succession checks. Should
   `managementMode` replace this mechanism or coexist with it?

> 3. **Telemetry**: What telemetry should be collected? At minimum

Reviewer 3: PM discussion - but I wonder if it would be valuable to have another `CRDsVersion` status condition and report that to Telemetry so we understand versioning needs. Could be future goals.

Author: agreed. I think I will add the CRDVersion also as an open question, doesn't need to be explicit goal right now, more like "we know this may be needed"

   the configured mode. Should CIO also report metrics for CRD
   compliance and mode transitions?

4. **Singleton creation**: Should the `cluster` singleton instance

>    be created by CVO (via a manifest in the release payload) or

Reviewer 3: Don't quote me on it, but I think CVO is the right answer. You can place it in the manifest directory in cluster-ingress-operator, and the CVO installs it.

Author: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/140e0bf13b3d01c369672c766c44b4be0b4ec78c/manifests/03-cluster-operator.yaml#L1

I think CVO does not create it, per the comment here, but I don't know as well. Deferring to @Miciah

Reviewer 2: The clusteroperator resource is a special case; the comment you cited doesn't apply to other resources.  

The installer creates config resources, and each operator is responsible for its operator resource.  

An operator can either include its operator resource in its `manifests/` directory so that CVO creates it (for example, see console-operator's [`manifests/01-operator-config.yaml`](https://github.com/openshift/console-operator/blob/a3001e8ac3d7a0a934d3ea605648c3f1a4d26445/manifests/01-operator-config.yaml)) or create the resource at run-time (for example, see cluster-dns-operator's [`ensureDefaultDNS`](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-dns-operator/blob/8395f9054f235aec2cd5185019d201146c9827ed/pkg/operator/operator.go#L196-L213) method).

Author: @Miciah so, in your opinion, should we make it a CVO manifest or have it as part of CIO startup creation? 

I vote for the first one so it is one less thing to care, but we can also make CIO reconcile it without any issue if you feel this is the better approach

Reviewer 3: IMO going in `/manifests` and letting CVO create it is the right answer. All you have to do it just drop it there, no other changes required (CVO automatically picks it up). Start with that, we can always change later if there is a problem.

As a side note, @Miciah is right, https://github.com/openshift/console-operator/blob/a3001e8ac3d7a0a934d3ea605648c3f1a4d26445/manifests/01-operator-config.yaml just tells CVO what to include in the must gather, it's a unique case you can disregard for our purpose. But ironically, you probably want to add `ingresses.operator.openshift.io` to this relatedObjects at some point (so we get it in the must-gather). You'd probably need to wait for FG to be GA though.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, using `/manifests` is sufficient and is easier.  However, one thing to watch out for is HyperShift's out-of-order application of manifests: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/2023#discussion_r3668934437

Author: will address this open question as a followup, unless @gcs278 want to approve the EP still this week for me :)

   by CIO on first startup? This affects upgrade behavior and
   needs alignment with the operator pattern used by DNS/Console.

5. **Kind name collision**: The proposed Kind `Ingress` in
   `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` shares a name with the well-known
   `networking.k8s.io/v1` Ingress. While API groups disambiguate,

>    this may cause user confusion with `oc get ingress`. The short

Reviewer 3: this current exists for `dns.operator.openshift.io` and `dns.config.openshift.io` and yes it's pretty annoying 😄 but not a deal breaker.

Author: I think this is a filler, removed

- `Managed` and `Unmanaged` modes fully functional.
- Status conditions implemented and observable.
- Unit and integration tests passing.
- Initial e2e tests for basic mode transitions.
- End user documentation for Tech Preview.

### Tech Preview -> GA

- All e2e test scenarios passing consistently (95%+ pass rate).
- Upgrade and downgrade testing with mode transitions validated.
- Mode transition edge cases tested (e.g., incompatible CRDs,
  missing CRDs).
- Telemetry for management mode implemented and reporting.
- Load testing with mode transitions under concurrent operations.
- User-facing documentation created in
  [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/).
- Feature gate promoted to `Default` feature set.
- API promoted from `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` to
  `operator.openshift.io/v1`.
- Sufficient time for customer feedback (at least one minor
  release in Tech Preview).

### Backport to OCP 4.19

The official backport target is OCP 4.19. Without this backport,
customers on 4.19 with third-party Gateway API CRDs face CRD
succession conflicts when upgrading, because CIO enforces
ownership with no opt-out. Backporting lets customers set

> `Unmanaged` before upgrading.

Reviewer 3: *nit* I get what you are saying, but this is confusing.

I think it really means 4.18 when it talks about "succession conflicts when upgrading". The benefit for 4.19 is the same as 4.20, 4.21, 4.22, and 5.0: new 3rd party implementation requiring newer CRDs can be enabled.

The upgrade problem is solved by the 4.18 backport, not by the 4.19 backport.

Author: changed here for 4.18, I would expect some noise here but we can discuss with @knobunc and @Miciah how to make this viable

> **Note**: There is also a desire to backport to OCP 4.18, as the
> lack of this feature is currently blocking 4.18 upgrades for
> customers with third-party CRDs. This requires the same SBAR
> exception process and is subject to architect approval.

**SBAR exception process**: Backporting a new CRD to a released
version requires SBAR (Situation, Background, Assessment,
Recommendation) with architect approval. The SBAR must justify
the backport (customer upgrade path continuity) and demonstrate
bounded risk.

Backport scope:
- Ingress CRD manifest for `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` (CVO).
- `gatewayAPI` spec/status structs with both enum values.
- `status.gatewayAPI.conditions` reporting.
- Feature gate `GatewayAPIManagementMode` (behind

>   `TechPreviewNoUpgrade`).

Reviewer 3: is this saying we can only backport as `TechPreviewNoUpgrade`? I don't think that's right, we need GA in backports.

Author: added that this will happen while testing e2e and then it will be promoted

testing with newer CRD versions.

This mode was removed from the proposal due to a lack of evidence
that it would be used in practice. The primary customer need is to
opt out of CIO's CRD management entirely (to use a third-party
controller), which `Unmanaged` mode addresses. Running the OpenShift
controller against arbitrary externally-provided CRDs introduces
significant compatibility risks (unknown fields, schema mismatches)
with limited benefit. This decision will be revisited if customer
demand or concrete use cases emerge.

### Alternative 2: Boolean Gateway API Disable Switch

Prohibited by OpenShift API conventions (no boolean fields in CRDs).
Also does not provide the observability benefits of the enum pattern.

### Alternative 3: Modify `ingress.config.openshift.io/cluster`

That resource is owned by `config-operator` for install-time
configuration (base domain, HSTS policies, component routes).
Gateway API operational behavior belongs in `operator.openshift.io`.

### Alternative 4: Annotation-Based Configuration

Lacks validation, defaulting, and discoverability. Not visible in
`oc describe` as structured fields.

### Alternative 5: Separate `GatewayAPIConfig` CRD

> Adds unnecessary complexity. CRD management is an ingress concern,

Reviewer 3: *nit* sorry I don't think this current argument makes sense. Maybe you meant:

```suggestion
Adds unnecessary complexity. CRD management is an operator configuration,
```

Author: fixed

---
title: gateway-api-crd-management-mode
authors:
  - "@rikatz"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@gcs278"
  - "@everettraven"
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
api-approvers:
  - "@everettraven"
creation-date: 2026-05-26

> last-updated: 2026-09-17

Author: updated, will push soon

status: implementable
tracking-link:

>   - https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/NE-2733

Author: moved to use NE-2732 which is the epic

`gatewayclass`, `gateway-labeler`, `gateway-network-policy`,
`gateway-service-dns`, `gateway-status`, and other controllers
that may be added in the future).

Two modes are provided: `Managed` (default -- CIO owns everything,
controllers are enabled) and `Unmanaged` (CIO stops managing,
reports observational status only).

## Motivation

As established by the
[gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management](gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md)
and
[gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md)
enhancements, CIO owns the Gateway API CRDs, pins them to a
specific version, protects them with Validating Admission Policies
(VAPs), and upgrades them during cluster upgrades. This default
suits most customers but creates friction for:

1. **Third-party Gateway API implementations**: Customers using
   Envoy Gateway, Traefik, Kong, or other non-OpenShift controllers
   cannot install their own CRD versions because CIO owns and
   protects them.

2. **Development and testing**: Platform engineers who need newer CRD
   versions must fight the VAP and CIO reconciler.

3. **Supportability**: No API-level signal indicates who owns the

>    CRDs or whether the current state is intentional.

Reviewer 2: We have limited API-level signal — CIO puts a message in the clusteroperator's "Degraded" status condition if it detects any CRDs in the "gateway.networking.k8s.io" APi group that CIO isn't managing, and it will log errors if it cannot create or update the CRDs.  But fair point that we don't propagate failures to create or update the CRDs to the clusteroperator status.

1. The cluster administrator installs or upgrades OpenShift.
2. CIO reads the Ingress (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster`
   resource and observes that `spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode`
   is unset (defaults to `Managed`).
3. CIO deploys Gateway API CRDs, VAP, the CIO-managed Istio
   instance, GatewayClass, and Gateway resources as per the existing
   behavior.
4. CIO sets the following conditions in `status.conditions`:
   - `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True` (reason: `ManagedByIngressOperator`)
   - `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`
   - `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`
5. External consumers observe the conditions and proceed normally.

#### Workflow 2: Switching to Unmanaged Mode

1. The cluster administrator decides to use a third-party Gateway
   API implementation.
2. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Unmanaged
   ```
3. CIO detects the mode change and begins transition:
   a. Stops the CIO-managed Istio instance.

>    b. Removes the VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs.

Author: @coderabbitai this doesn't make sense, can you explain? The idea here is to say to remove the resource VAP that is protecting the Gateway API CRDs"

>    b. Removes the VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs.

Reviewer 2: "the VAP that protects Gateway API CRDs" would be unambiguous.

>    c. Does **not** remove the GatewayClass, Gateway resources, or

Reviewer 2: For the record, this was resolved with https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/2023/changes/db85c75b1be059d92497dfea04fd339e67dc2622.

   versions or fields).

#### Workflow 3: Returning to Managed Mode

1. The cluster administrator wants to return to the fully managed
   configuration.
2. The cluster administrator should ensure the existing Gateway API
   CRDs match the version CIO expects, or remove them entirely.
3. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Managed
   ```
4. CIO detects the mode change and begins transition.
   `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` remains `False` until CIO successfully
   takes ownership:
   a. If CRDs are absent, CIO installs them.
   b. If CRDs are present and match the expected version, CIO takes
      ownership (adds labels, deploys VAP) and sets
      `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True`.
   c. If CRDs are present but do not match the expected version, CIO
      sets `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=False` (in `status.conditions`)
      and does NOT overwrite them. `GatewayAPICRDsManaged` stays
      `False`. The administrator must resolve the mismatch before

>       CIO can take ownership.

Author: @coderabbitai but the condition GatewayAPICRDsCompliant already covers it so this may be an unnecessary duplication and making conditions more complex

>       CIO can take ownership.

Reviewer 2: For what it's worth, I had the same thought process:

- First thought: It feels like the set of reasons for the status condition should reflect that there are two distinct reasons for reporting `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False`:

    - `spec` has "Unmanaged" or
    - a conflict prevents the operator from managing the CRDs.  

- Second thought: It can be inferred from the full set of status conditions, and in particular from `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False` together with `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=False`, if the reason for `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False` is a conflict.  

I have a weak preference for using distinct reason values here, but it isn't strictly necessary if the reason can be inferred without explicit distinct values.

// integration in the Cluster Ingress Operator.
// +kubebuilder:validation:MinProperties=1
type GatewayAPIIngressConfig struct {
	// managementMode specifies how the Cluster Ingress
	// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions
	// (CRDs), the OpenShift Gateway API implementation, and its
	// Gateway API controllers.
	//
	// When empty or set to "Managed", the ingress operator
	// installs, owns, and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs, protects
	// them with a Validating Admission Policy, and deploys the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation and its Gateway API
	// controllers. This is the only fully supported configuration.
	//
	// When set to "Unmanaged", the ingress operator does not
	// install or manage Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation or its Gateway API
	// controllers. The cluster administrator or a third-party
	// product is responsible for providing their own CRDs and
	// Gateway controller.
	//
	// +optional
	ManagementMode GatewayAPIManagementMode `json:"managementMode,omitempty"`
}
```

The field paths are:

```
spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode
status.conditions

> ```

Author: done, will push next

longer applies.

#### CIO Controller Changes

The CIO controllers that manage the Gateway API feature (`gatewayapi`,
`gatewayclass`, `gateway-labeler`, `gateway-network-policy`,
`gateway-service-dns`, `gateway-status`, and others) are deactivated
in `Unmanaged` mode.

#### Istio and Gateway API Controllers Start Condition

CIO starts the CIO-managed Istio instance and the CIO Gateway API
controllers only when all three of the following conditions are
`True` in `status.conditions`:

- `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True`
- `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`
- `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`

If any of these conditions is not `True` (e.g., during a transition
back to `Managed` where CRDs are non-compliant, or while CIO is
installing CRDs), the Istio instance and CIO Gateway API
controllers are not started. This is not a degraded state: these
conditions do not contribute to the
operator's `Degraded` status condition and do not block cluster
upgrades. They are informational signals about Gateway API CRD
readiness.

#### VAP Management

The VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs is deployed only in `Managed`
mode. When transitioning away from `Managed`, the VAP must be

> removed first to avoid leaving CRDs locked.

Reviewer 2: This is an interesting point.  The ClusterOperator status could report `Progressing=True` during the transition; should it report `Degraded=True` if the transition has failed?

> removed first to avoid leaving CRDs locked.

Author: I can add this condition as part of the implementation and a followup on the EP if this is not a blocker

CRD RBAC to modify Gateway API CRDs.

**Mitigation**: Explicit trade-off. Standard Kubernetes RBAC still
applies. Documentation must state that VAP protection is removed.

### Drawbacks

Increased CIO complexity: two behavioral modes with different
controller enable/disable states and mode transition logic. This is
justified by customer demand -- the alternative is customers
fighting the VAP and CRD reconciler.

## Open Questions

1. **Telemetry**: What telemetry should be collected? At minimum
   the configured mode, CRD version, and OSSM version. Should CIO
   also report metrics for CRD compliance and mode transitions?

2. **Singleton creation**: Should the `cluster` singleton instance
   be created by CVO (via a manifest in the release payload) or
   by CIO on first startup? This affects upgrade behavior and
   needs alignment with the operator pattern used by DNS/Console.

## Test Plan

<!-- TODO: Tests must include the following labels per
dev-guide/feature-zero-to-hero.md:
- [OCPFeatureGate:GatewayAPIManagementMode] for the feature gate
- [Jira:"Networking / ingress"] for the component
- Appropriate test type labels: [Serial], [Slow], [Disruptive]
  as needed

> - Reference dev-guide/test-conventions.md for details -->

Author: this is a TODO for a comment on how to promote, there is no actionable item on the EP

> - Reference dev-guide/test-conventions.md for details -->

Reviewer 2: Usually I would delete this sort of boilerplate from the template, but it isn't too important whether you delete it or whether you keep it given that it is an HTML comment and is therefore invisible in the rendered EP.

**Resolution**: Either upgrade the CRDs to the expected version or
remove them and let CIO reinstall them. Valid CRD manifests can be
extracted from the `cluster-ingress-operator` container image in
the cluster's current release payload (Gateway API CRD manifests
are bundled at `/gateway-api-manifests/` in that image), or
obtained from the upstream Gateway API release at
`https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases` matching
the expected version shown in the condition message.

```bash
# Check expected version from condition message
oc get ingress.operator.openshift.io cluster \
  -o jsonpath='{.status.conditions}' | \
  jq '.[] | select(.type=="GatewayAPICRDsCompliant")'

# Authenticate to the release image registry using the cluster's
# pull secret
oc get secret/pull-secret -n openshift-config \
  -o jsonpath='{.data.\.dockerconfigjson}' | base64 -d > pull-secret.json

# Extract the Gateway API CRD manifests from the
# cluster-ingress-operator image in the cluster's current
# release payload
CIO_IMAGE=$(oc adm release info --image-for=cluster-ingress-operator \
  --registry-config=pull-secret.json)
oc image extract "${CIO_IMAGE}" --registry-config=pull-secret.json \

>   --path /gateway-api-manifests/:./gateway-api-manifests --confirm

Author: This is an example, not a script. It should be used under user discretion

---
title: gateway-api-crd-management-mode
authors:
  - "@rikatz"
reviewers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@gcs278"
  - "@everettraven"
  - "@crswng" # Hypershift SME
approvers:
  - "@Miciah"
  - "@gcs278"
api-approvers:
  - "@everettraven"
creation-date: 2026-05-26
last-updated: 2026-07-28
status: implementable
tracking-link:
  - https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/NE-2732
see-also:
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md"
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md"
  - "/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-without-olm.md"
  - "/enhancements/ingress/add-dns-and-loadbalancer-conditions-to-managed-gateway.md"
---

# Gateway API CRD Management Mode

## Summary

This enhancement introduces a new cluster-scoped singleton API
resource, `Ingress` (resource `ingresses`, singleton named

> `cluster`), in the `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` group.

Reviewer 2: The TPNU→GA graduation of this EP will update the GV from `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` to `operator.openshift.io/v1`, right?  It is a little strange, and possibly confusing, to refer to "v1alpha1" throughout the EP if that is the plan.

Author: once we promote we can move to v1, I would not like to change this right now nor block the EP merging. We need this merged for the API work as well

quickly determine who owns the Gateway API CRDs on a cluster and
whether the current CRD state matches the configured ownership mode
so that I can diagnose issues without needing to inspect labels,
annotations, and controller logs manually.

#### Story 3: Operational Monitoring

As a fleet administrator, I want to monitor Gateway API CRD ownership
state via standard OpenShift status conditions so that I can detect
clusters where CRD ownership is misconfigured or where CRDs have
drifted from the expected state.

### Goals

1. Provide a `managementMode` enum field on a new Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) singleton with two modes:
   `Managed` and `Unmanaged`.
2. Allow customers and third-party products to take full control of
   Gateway API CRDs without fighting CIO's reconciler or VAP.
3. Expose status conditions reporting CRD ownership mode, presence,
   and version compliance.
4. Preserve the current fully-managed behavior as the default,
   requiring no action from existing customers.
5. Define clear upgrade and downgrade semantics for mode transitions.

### Non-Goals

1. **CRD version ranges**: Each OCP version supports a specific

>    Gateway API CRD version, not a version within a range.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth specifying "_x_._y_._z_ version" (as opposed to "_x_._y_") in case we bump CRDs in z-stream?

Author: no, I don't think so. I think we need to be either all or nothing here for now, we can make it soft later, but we need to move with the current requirement of users of "give me the control"

2. **Automatic migration of third-party CRDs**: When switching from
   `Unmanaged` to `Managed`, CIO will not migrate third-party CRDs.
   The administrator must ensure compatibility before changing modes.
3. **MicroShift support**: MicroShift does not use CIO and is
   unaffected by this enhancement.
4. **Istio CRD management**: This enhancement controls only Gateway
   API CRDs (`gateway.networking.k8s.io`). Istio CRDs are handled
   by the sail-operator library as described in
   [gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md).

## Proposal

Introduce a new cluster-scoped singleton API resource in the
`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` group:

- **Kind**: `Ingress`
- **Resource**: `ingresses`
- **Scope**: Cluster (non-namespaced)
- **Singleton name**: `cluster`

The spec contains a `gatewayAPI` struct with a
`managementMode` enum.

CIO watches this resource and reads
`spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode` to determine its behavior:

- **Managed** (default): CIO installs, protects (via VAP), and
  upgrades Gateway API CRDs, runs the CIO-managed Istio instance,
  and runs the CIO Gateway API controllers (`gatewayapi`,
  `gatewayclass`, `gateway-labeler`, `gateway-network-policy`,

>   `gateway-service-dns`, `gateway-status`, and others). This is

Reviewer 2: You have an exhaustive list of CIO controllers that are directly related to Gateway API, and saying "others" without the qualifier "any" implies that this list is non-exhaustive.  
```suggestion
  `gateway-service-dns`, `gateway-status`, and any others that may be added in the future). This is
```

Author: if not a blocker, leaving for followup update

  the current behavior and the only fully supported configuration.

- **Unmanaged**: CIO does not install CRDs, does not run the
  CIO-managed Istio instance, and does not run the CIO Gateway
  API controllers (`gatewayapi`, `gatewayclass`, `gateway-labeler`,
  `gateway-network-policy`, `gateway-service-dns`, `gateway-status`,

>   and others). The customer or a third-party product owns the
>   CRDs and Gateway controller. CIO reports

Reviewer 2: I suggest deleting "and Gateway controller" so as not to imply that the customer or third-party should be managing the OpenShift gateway controller.  
```suggestion
  and others). The customer or a third-party product owns the
  CRDs. CIO reports
```

Reviewer 2: Or maybe change it to "and any third-party Gateway controller".

Author: if not a blocker, leaving for followup update

1. The cluster administrator decides to use a third-party Gateway
   API implementation.
2. The cluster administrator edits the Ingress
   (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) `cluster` resource:
   ```yaml
   apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Ingress
   metadata:
     name: cluster
   spec:
     gatewayAPI:
       managementMode: Unmanaged
   ```
3. CIO detects the mode change and begins transition:
   a. Stops the CIO-managed Istio instance.
   b. Removes the VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs.
   c. Does **not** remove the GatewayClass, Gateway resources, or
      Gateway API CRDs. Removing these resources could cause
      disruptions to existing workloads served by these Gateways.
      The cluster administrator is responsible for cleaning up
      these resources if desired, for example once a third-party
      Gateway controller has taken over management.
   d. Leaves any proxy pods created as a result of Gateway
      provisioning in place, avoiding traffic disruption.
   e. Leaves resources previously created by CIO Gateway API
      controllers (like DNSRecord and NetworkPolicy for a
      previously managed Gateway) in place, unless the parent

>       Gateway is also removed.

Reviewer 2: GitHub renders the items a-e as a paragraph.  If you want this to render with a new line for each item, you might need to tweak the formatting.

Author: if not a blocker, leaving for followup update

// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=GatewayAPIManagementMode
type Ingress struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// metadata is the standard object's metadata.
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	// spec holds user settable values for configuration.
	// +required
	Spec IngressSpec `json:"spec,omitzero"`

	// status holds observed values from the cluster.
	// +optional
	Status IngressStatus `json:"status,omitzero"`
}

type IngressSpec struct {
	// gatewayAPI holds configuration for Gateway API
	// integration, including how the ingress operator manages
	// Gateway API CRDs, the Istio instance it deploys, and its
	// Gateway API controllers.
	//
	// +optional
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI,omitzero"`
}

type IngressStatus struct {
	// observedGeneration is the last generation change you've dealt with
	// +optional
	ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`

	// conditions is a list of conditions and their status.
	// Gateway API CRD management conditions are reported here
	// with the "GatewayAPI" prefix:
	//

> 	// "GatewayAPICRDsManaged" indicates whether the ingress operator is
> 	// actively managing Gateway API CRDs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// "GatewayAPICRDsManaged" indicates whether the ingress operator is
	// actively managing Gateway API CRDs.
```

Author: if not a blocker, leaving for followup update

will be created in the hosted cluster's API, and will be 
managed entirely by the owner/admin of the hosted cluster.

#### Standalone Clusters

Primary topology. Both modes apply with no special considerations.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift

**SNO**: No additional resource concerns. `Unmanaged` mode allows
disabling the CIO-managed Istio instance and CIO Gateway API
controllers to reclaim resources.

**MicroShift**: Not affected. MicroShift does not use CIO (see
[MicroShift Gateway API Support](../microshift/gateway-api-support.md)),
and the new `Ingress` (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) resource
should not be installed on it.

#### OpenShift Kubernetes Engine

Both modes are available on OKE. However, Gateway API support on
OKE depends on the
[gateway-api-without-olm](gateway-api-without-olm.md) enhancement
which eliminates OSSM licensing concerns. Given the desire to
backport this management mode feature to OCP 4.18, OKE enablement
depends on whether `gateway-api-without-olm` is also backported
to the same version. If that enhancement is not backported, OKE
support for this feature is limited to the OCP version where

> `gateway-api-without-olm` is first available.

Reviewer 2: Do we really need no-OLM to be backported to 4.18 in order to backport the knob to 4.18?  Gateway API support was in the TPNU featureset in 4.18.  We want the knob to be in the Default featureset in 4.18 so that it can be set to "Unmanaged" prior to a 4.18→4.19 upgrade where Gateway API gets added to the Default featureset.

Author: No, I think we can backport this without noOLM. That said, I can address this on a followup PR if this is not a blocker

back to `Managed` where CRDs are non-compliant, or while CIO is
installing CRDs), the Istio instance and CIO Gateway API
controllers are not started. This is not a degraded state: these
conditions do not contribute to the
operator's `Degraded` status condition and do not block cluster
upgrades. They are informational signals about Gateway API CRD
readiness.

#### VAP Management

The VAP protecting Gateway API CRDs is deployed only in `Managed`
mode. When transitioning away from `Managed`, the VAP must be
removed first to avoid leaving CRDs locked.

#### CRD Validity Definition

A Gateway API CRD is considered **compliant** when:

1. **Strict version match**: The CRD's
   `gateway.networking.k8s.io/bundle-version` annotation matches
   the exact Gateway API version that CIO expects (e.g.,
   `v1.2.1`). Version ranges are not supported (see Non-Goals).

2. **Semantic verification**: The CRDs are compared against the
   expected schema using
   `"k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/api/equality".Semantic.DeepEqual`.

When CRDs are non-compliant, CIO reports the mismatch in the
`GatewayAPICRDsCompliant` condition message, including expected vs. actual

> versions and where to obtain valid manifests. Valid CRD manifests

Reviewer 2: Does the status condition message report just the `gateway.networking.k8s.io/bundle-version` version?  What if `bundle-version` matches but the semantic diff fails?

Author: No, it reports a mismatch, we can expand the message of the status condition to say if there is a version mismatch or a semantic diff mismatch.

#### Future Work on the Ingress Resource

The new Ingress (`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) resource is designed
to accommodate future configuration beyond `managementMode`:

1. **GatewayClass customization**: The `gatewayAPI` struct can be
   extended to allow administrators to define additional OpenShift
   GatewayClasses in a structured way -- specifying service type,
   resource allocation for Envoy proxies, and other per-class
   parameters. This would replace the current model where only a
   single default GatewayClass is created by CIO.

2. **Operator and operand logging levels**: `OperatorSpec` (which
   includes `logLevel` for operands and `operatorLogLevel` for the
   operator) is not embedded in `IngressSpec` today, but could be
   added if the logging level controls originally proposed in
   [ingress-operator-operand-logging-level](ingress-operator-operand-logging-level.md)
   are implemented on this resource, providing a supported API for
   adjusting CIO and Gateway controller verbosity.

These are out of scope for this enhancement.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Risk: Orphaned Resources During Mode Transition

> Switching to `Unmanaged` leaves GatewayClass, Gateway, and
> HTTPRoute resources without a managing controller.

Reviewer 2: "Unmanaged" also orphans GRPCRoute, BackendTLSPolicy, and ReferenceGrant, right?  And we can anticipate TLSRoute, Backend, and more in the future.  
```suggestion
Switching to `Unmanaged` leaves GatewayClass, Gateway,
HTTPRoute, and other Gateway API resources without a managing controller.
```

Author: If not a blocker, I would like to address as a followup

**Mitigation**: CIO preserves all Gateway API resources during
transitions to avoid disruption. The administrator is responsible
for cleanup. Documentation must state this clearly.

#### Risk: Incompatible Mode Transition

Switching to `Managed` may fail if existing CRDs do not match the
expected version.

**Mitigation**: CIO verifies CRD compliance before taking
ownership. If incompatible, CIO sets `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=False` and
does not overwrite. The administrator must resolve the mismatch.

#### Risk: Security Implications of Removing VAP

In `Unmanaged` mode, the VAP is removed, allowing any actor with
CRD RBAC to modify Gateway API CRDs.

**Mitigation**: Explicit trade-off. Standard Kubernetes RBAC still
applies. Documentation must state that VAP protection is removed.

### Drawbacks

Increased CIO complexity: two behavioral modes with different
controller enable/disable states and mode transition logic. This is
justified by customer demand -- the alternative is customers
fighting the VAP and CRD reconciler.

## Open Questions

1. **Telemetry**: What telemetry should be collected? At minimum
   the configured mode, CRD version, and OSSM version. Should CIO

>    also report metrics for CRD compliance and mode transitions?

Reviewer 2: Is OSSM version relevant for this EP?  

Story 3 does imply that we would have telemetry for CRD versions, but I didn't see this addressed anywhere except in the "Tech Preview -> GA" criteria:  https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/7238cba9028b739cf355f44a1a41b604ad3e843d/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-management-mode.md#L84-L89 / https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/7238cba9028b739cf355f44a1a41b604ad3e843d/enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-crd-management-mode.md#L754

Author: this can be added as part of the implementation, I wouldn't expect honestly OSSM version being relevant, but can add it

2. **Singleton creation**: Should the `cluster` singleton instance
   be created by CVO (via a manifest in the release payload) or
   by CIO on first startup? This affects upgrade behavior and
   needs alignment with the operator pattern used by DNS/Console.

## Test Plan

<!-- TODO: Tests must include the following labels per
dev-guide/feature-zero-to-hero.md:
- [OCPFeatureGate:GatewayAPIManagementMode] for the feature gate
- [Jira:"Networking / ingress"] for the component
- Appropriate test type labels: [Serial], [Slow], [Disruptive]
  as needed
- Reference dev-guide/test-conventions.md for details -->

Testing strategy covers unit tests, integration tests, and e2e tests
for each management mode and mode transitions.

### Unit Tests

- Validation of the `managementMode` field (valid enum values,
  defaulting behavior).
- Status condition computation logic for each mode.
- Controller enable/disable logic based on mode.

### Integration Tests

- CRD management controller behavior in each mode.
- VAP deployment and removal during mode transitions.

> - Status condition updates during mode transitions.

Reviewer 2: These test definitions are pretty vague.  I would expect integration tests in openshift/api to verify that `managementMode` is defaulted and validated properly, unit tests in cluster-ingress-operator to verify that status is computed properly and that controllers are started and stopped (or that their reconciliation happens or is inhibited) as appropriate, and unit or E2E tests to verify that the VAP is created or deleted as appropriate.

### E2E Tests

The following e2e test scenarios are required:

1. **Managed mode (default)**: Verify that a new cluster has CRDs
   installed, VAP deployed, and the CIO-managed Istio instance

>    and CIO Gateway API controllers running. Verify

Reviewer 2: CIO doesn't deploy Istio until a GatewayClass is created.

Author: right, and we do it on our e2e tests, so this is just missing being very explicit here right?

   `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=True`, `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=True`, and
   `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=True`.

2. **Transition to Unmanaged**: Set mode to `Unmanaged`. Verify
   that the CIO-managed Istio instance is stopped, the VAP is
   removed, and CRDs, GatewayClass, and Gateway resources are
   preserved. Verify `GatewayAPICRDsManaged=False` with reason

>    `Unmanaged`. Verify a third-party GatewayClass can be created.

Reviewer 2: Creating a third-party GatewayClass is possible even without this enhancement.  How about creating a third-party CRD in the "gateway.networking.k8s.io" API group?

Author: no, this is blocked on the VAP IIRC.

3. **Return to Managed**: From `Unmanaged`, return to `Managed`.
   Verify CIO takes ownership of compatible CRDs, or reports
   `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant=False` for mismatched CRDs.

> 4. **Unmanaged mode with absent CRDs**: Set mode to `Unmanaged` on
>    a cluster with no Gateway API CRDs. Verify CIO does not install
>    CRDs and reports `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=False`.

Reviewer 2: This test setup seems backwards.  It wouldn't set "Unmanaged" on a cluster that already has no Gateway API CRDs; the test must set `managementMode` to "Unmanaged" and then delete the CRDs, _and only then_ will the cluster have no Gateway API CRDs, right?  
```suggestion
4. **Unmanaged mode with absent CRDs**: Set mode to `Unmanaged`.
   Delete the Gateway API CRDs. Verify CIO does not install
   CRDs and reports `GatewayAPICRDsPresent=False`.
```

Author: will leave for a followup update if not a blocker

5. **Upgrade with non-default mode**: Upgrade a cluster that has
   `Unmanaged` mode set. Verify the mode is preserved and CIO does

>    not attempt to take over CRDs during upgrade.

Reviewer 2: This test would be tricky to implement — I expect it would require a custom CI upgrade job.

Reviewer 2: ...and if you need a custom CI upgrade job for the test, I don't expect it can usefully contribute to featuregate promotion.

Author: not sure how this could be tested, but I was willing to try and if not possible remove from the EP or ask for architects their thinking about it.

## Graduation Criteria

<!-- TODO: Promotion requirements per
dev-guide/feature-zero-to-hero.md:
- Minimum 5 tests
- 7 runs per week
- 14 runs per supported platform
- 95% pass rate
- Tests running on all supported platforms
  (AWS, Azure, GCP, vSphere, Baremetal with IPv4/IPv6/Dual) -->

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

- Feature gate `GatewayAPIManagementMode` added to
  `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.
- `Managed` and `Unmanaged` modes fully functional.
- Status conditions implemented and observable.
- Unit and integration tests passing.
- Initial e2e tests for basic mode transitions.
- End user documentation for Tech Preview.

### Tech Preview -> GA

- All e2e test scenarios passing consistently (95%+ pass rate).
- Upgrade and downgrade testing with mode transitions validated.
- Mode transition edge cases tested (e.g., incompatible CRDs,
  missing CRDs).
- Telemetry for management mode implemented and reporting.

> - Load testing with mode transitions under concurrent operations.

Reviewer 2: Is that load testing to rule out race conditions?

Author: yes, but I am considering actually this one useless and would remove

- User-facing documentation created in
  [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/).
- Feature gate promoted to `Default` feature set.
- API promoted from `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` to

>   `operator.openshift.io/v1`.

Reviewer 2: The API would be promoted to v1 first and then the featuregate would be promoted afterwards, right?

Author: yes, this is not an order of execution, it is a task list

- Sufficient time for customer feedback (at least one minor

>   release in Tech Preview).

Reviewer 2: Is this "at least one minor release in Tech Preview" criterion copypasta?

Author: yes, probably. can remove on a followup if not a blocker, I am willing to follow the same process of the noOLM

### Backport to OCP 4.18

The official backport target is OCP 4.18. Without this backport,
customers on 4.18 with third-party Gateway API CRDs face CRD
succession conflicts when upgrading, because CIO enforces
ownership with no opt-out. Backporting lets customers set
`Unmanaged` before upgrading.

**SBAR exception process**: Backporting a new CRD to a released
version requires SBAR (Situation, Background, Assessment,
Recommendation) with architect approval. The SBAR must justify
the backport (customer upgrade path continuity) and demonstrate
bounded risk.

Backport scope:

> - Ingress CRD manifest for `operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1` (CVO).

Reviewer 2: Does "CVO" mean "CVO manifest in cluster-ingress-operator"?

Author: this is because there was a pending discussion of where this should live, but yes, the idea is that whoever installs the CRDs will now need to backport this installation

- `gatewayAPI` spec/status structs with both enum values.

> - `status.conditions` Gateway API condition reporting.

Reviewer 2: Is this `status.conditions` inside the new ingresses.operator.openshift.io CRD?

Author: yes, as defined on the API

- Feature gate `GatewayAPIManagementMode` (initially behind
  `TechPreviewNoUpgrade`, then `GA` once the E2E requirements pass).
- CIO controller changes.

**E2E requirements**: 95%+ pass rate, 7 runs/week on supported
platforms.

The backport does not change CRD succession logic from
[gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management](gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md).
It adds the opt-out mechanism on top of existing behavior.

### Removing a deprecated feature

Not applicable. This enhancement adds new functionality.

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Upgrade

When upgrading from a version that does not have the Ingress
(`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) resource to one that does (e.g.,
upgrading from 4.17 to 4.18 with the backport applied):

- CVO installs the new Ingress CRD. The `cluster` singleton is
  created with `spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode` defaulting to

>   `Managed`, preserving existing behavior. No action is required

Reviewer 2: The "defaulting to `Managed`" is implicit — that is, the persisted value is empty — right?

Author: right, that's what I have changed in the API. I just missed to update here, but I can do on a followup if possible

  CRDs during the upgrade. The administrator's third-party CRDs
  are preserved.

### Downgrade

When downgrading from a version that has the Ingress
(`operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1`) resource to one that does not:

- The Ingress CRD and `cluster` singleton persist on the cluster
  (CRDs are not removed during rollbacks), but the older CIO does
  not watch this resource. It has no effect.
- The older CIO behaves as `Managed` (its only behavior) and
  attempts to install and manage Gateway API CRDs.
- **If the cluster was in `Unmanaged` mode**: The downgraded CIO
  will attempt to install CRDs and deploy the Istio instance and
  Gateway API controllers. If third-party CRDs are present, the
  existing CRD management succession logic (from
  [gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management](gateway-api-crd-life-cycle-management.md))
  applies.

**Recommendation**: Set mode to `Managed` and ensure CRD
compatibility before downgrading.

## Version Skew Strategy

During upgrade, CIO may start before CVO creates the Ingress CRD.
CIO treats the absence as `Managed` mode (existing behavior). The
field is consumed only by CIO and requires no cross-component

> coordination.

Reviewer 2: Using a default in the absence of a _field_ is typical behavior, and maybe even using a default in the absence of a _CR_, but using a default value in the absence of a _CRD_ is unusual.  For what it's worth, CVO is supposed to install and upgrade manifests in lexographic order — but we have seen funny things happen on HyperShift, so it doesn't hurt to be resilient.  Does this mean the operator will have an explicit check for the CRD before starting watches on the custom resource?

Author: it can be added yes, even because otherwise it will break the implementation if we try to reconcile an unexisting CR.

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Operational impact is minimal -- one additional cluster-scoped
resource read during CIO reconciliation.

- **SLIs**: `status.conditions` (`GatewayAPICRDsManaged`,
  `GatewayAPICRDsPresent`, `GatewayAPICRDsCompliant`).

- **Failure modes**:
  - VAP removal failure during mode transition: CRDs remain locked.

>     CIO retries and reports in status.

Reviewer 2: Also, conflicting CRDs when going from unmanaged to managed.

Author: will leave for a followup update if not a blocker

- **Escalation**: Networking / Ingress team. For Istio CRD

>   interactions, consult the OSSM team.

Reviewer 2: Network Ingress & DNS team, "Networking / router" component for tickets in Jira.

Author: will leave for a followup update if not a blocker

## Support Procedures

### Detecting the Current Mode

```bash

> oc get ingress.operator.openshift.io cluster \
>   -o jsonpath='{.spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode}'

Reviewer 2: I like to add a trailing newline so that an overzealous shell prompt doesn't stomp it, and so it doesn't get lost somehow:
```suggestion
oc get ingress.operator.openshift.io cluster \
  -o jsonpath='{.spec.gatewayAPI.managementMode}{"\n"}'
```

Author: will leave for a followup update if not a blocker

A third mode, `ControllersOnly`, was considered where CIO would not
manage Gateway API CRDs but would still run the CIO-managed Istio
instance and CIO Gateway API controllers. The customer would bring
their own CRDs. This would have been an explicitly unsupported
configuration intended for development and testing with newer CRD
versions.

This mode was removed from the proposal due to a lack of evidence
that it would be used in practice. The primary customer need is to
opt out of CIO's CRD management entirely (to use a third-party
controller), which `Unmanaged` mode addresses. Running the OpenShift
controller against arbitrary externally-provided CRDs introduces
significant compatibility risks (unknown fields, schema mismatches)
with limited benefit. This decision will be revisited if customer
demand or concrete use cases emerge.

### Alternative 2: Boolean Gateway API Disable Switch

Prohibited by OpenShift API conventions (no boolean fields in CRDs).
Also does not provide the observability benefits of the enum pattern.

### Alternative 3: Modify `ingress.config.openshift.io/cluster`

That resource is owned by `config-operator` for install-time

> configuration (base domain, HSTS policies, component routes).

Reviewer 2: HSTS policies and component routes aren't necessarily or probably typically install-time configuration.  

I would say that ingresses.config.openshift.io is more for general ingress-related cluster configuration used by multiple components (including multiple operators and admission plugins), and ingresses.operator.openshift.io is specifically for ingress-operator configuration.

`IngressController` is namespaced and multi-instance, so it
cannot hold a cluster-wide setting without conflicts.
`ingress.config.openshift.io` is owned by `config-operator` for
install-time configuration. A dedicated singleton in
`operator.openshift.io` follows the DNS pattern and provides a
clean extension point.

The proposed Go types are in a new file in `operator/v1alpha1/` in
the `openshift/api` repository (e.g.,
`types_ingress.go`):

```go
// +genclient
// +genclient:nonNamespaced
// +k8s:deepcopy-gen:interfaces=k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/runtime.Object
//
// Ingress contains configuration options specific to the Ingress Operator itself.
//
// Compatibility level 4: No compatibility is provided, the API
// can change at any point for any reason. These capabilities
// should not be used by applications needing long-term support.
// +openshift:compatibility-gen:level=4
// +openshift:api-approved.openshift.io=<TBD>
// +openshift:file-pattern=cvoRunLevel=0000_50,operatorName=ingress,operatorOrdering=02
// +kubebuilder:object:root=true
// +kubebuilder:resource:path=ingresses,scope=Cluster
// +kubebuilder:subresource:status
// +openshift:capability=Ingress

> type Ingress struct {

Reviewer: If this is a cluster singleton that we are going to be creating with the name `cluster`, add this CEL expression for validation:
```
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.metadata.name == 'cluster'",message="ingress is a singleton, .metadata.name must be 'cluster'"
```

Author: done

> type Ingress struct {

Reviewer: Also, for v1alpha1 APIs we have to feature gate the whole API. This means that your initial API surface doesn't need to have any feature gated fields.

Author: so should I remove the FeatureGate mention, or add a global feature gate like "IngressOperatorAPI"

	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`

	// metadata is the standard object's metadata.
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	// spec holds user settable values for configuration.
	// +required

> 	Spec IngressSpec `json:"spec"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Spec IngressSpec `json:"spec,omitzero"`
```

Author: done

	// status holds observed values from the cluster.
	// +optional

> 	Status IngressStatus `json:"status"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Status IngressStatus `json:"status,omitzero"`
```

Author: done

}

type IngressSpec struct {
	// gatewayAPI holds configuration for Gateway API
	// integration, including how the ingress operator manages
	// Gateway API CRDs, the Istio instance it deploys, and its
	// Gateway API controllers.
	//
	// +required
	// +openshift:enable:FeatureGate=GatewayAPIManagementMode

> 	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI,omitzero"`
```

Author: done

	// supported by the OpenShift Gateway API implementation.
	GatewayAPIManagementModeUnmanaged GatewayAPIManagementMode = "Unmanaged"
)

// GatewayAPIIngressConfig holds configuration for Gateway API
// integration in the Cluster Ingress Operator.
type GatewayAPIIngressConfig struct {
	// managementMode specifies how the Cluster Ingress
	// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions
	// (CRDs), the OpenShift Gateway API implementation, and its
	// Gateway API controllers.
	//
	// When set to "Managed" (the default), the ingress operator
	// installs, owns, and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs, protects
	// them with a Validating Admission Policy, and deploys the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation and its Gateway API
	// controllers. This is the only fully supported configuration.
	//
	// When set to "Unmanaged", the ingress operator does not
	// install or manage Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation or its Gateway API
	// controllers. The cluster administrator or a third-party
	// product is responsible for providing their own CRDs and
	// Gateway controller.
	//
	// +kubebuilder:default:="Managed"
	// +default="Managed"

> 	// +required

Reviewer: Defaulting and the field being required are not markers that can be paired together. If a field is required, it cannot be omitted and therefore can never be defaulted.

Author: good catch, marking as optional here.

> 	ManagementMode GatewayAPIManagementMode `json:"managementMode"`

Reviewer: Add `omitempty` here since the empty string value is not a valid value.
```suggestion
	ManagementMode GatewayAPIManagementMode `json:"managementMode,omitempty"`
```

Author: done

}

type IngressSpec struct {
	// gatewayAPI holds configuration for Gateway API
	// integration, including how the ingress operator manages
	// Gateway API CRDs, the Istio instance it deploys, and its
	// Gateway API controllers.
	//
	// +required
	GatewayAPI GatewayAPIIngressConfig `json:"gatewayAPI,omitzero"`
}

type IngressStatus struct {
	// observedGeneration is the last generation change you've dealt with
	// +optional
	ObservedGeneration int64 `json:"observedGeneration,omitempty"`

	// conditions is a list of conditions and their status.
	// Gateway API CRD management conditions are reported here
	// with the "GatewayAPI" prefix:
	//
	// "GatewayAPICRDsManaged" indicates whether the ingress operator is
	// actively managing Gateway API CRDs:
	//   - status: True, reason: "ManagedByIngressOperator" — the
	//     ingress operator is installing, protecting (via VAP), and
	//     upgrading CRDs.
	//   - status: False, reason: "Unmanaged" — the administrator
	//     chose Unmanaged mode, or a conflict prevents the ingress
	//     operator from taking control of the CRDs; the ingress
	//     operator does not manage CRDs or run the OpenShift

> 	//     Gateway API implementation.

Reviewer: Very minor and non-blocking, but I'd be cautious of using lists here - sometimes they do not render well in tools like `oc explain ...` or generated documentation. We generally try to use plain sentences to avoid rendering issues where possible.

Author: it took me a time to understand you mean list on comments and not "listType" or something like that :) 

let me fix it here

type GatewayAPIManagementMode string

const (
	// GatewayAPIManagementModeManaged means the ingress operator
	// installs, owns, protects (via VAP), and upgrades the Gateway
	// API CRDs, deploys the OpenShift Gateway API implementation,
	// and runs its Gateway API controllers. This is the default
	// mode and the only fully supported configuration.
	GatewayAPIManagementModeManaged GatewayAPIManagementMode = "Managed"

	// GatewayAPIManagementModeUnmanaged means the ingress operator
	// does NOT install or manage Gateway API CRDs, does NOT
	// deploy the OpenShift Gateway API implementation, and does
	// NOT run its Gateway API controllers. The customer or a
	// third-party product is responsible for bringing their own
	// CRDs and Gateway controller. The ingress operator reports
	// observational status only. This mode signals to layered
	// products that the installed CRDs may not be the ones
	// supported by the OpenShift Gateway API implementation.
	GatewayAPIManagementModeUnmanaged GatewayAPIManagementMode = "Unmanaged"
)

// GatewayAPIIngressConfig holds configuration for Gateway API
// integration in the Cluster Ingress Operator.

> type GatewayAPIIngressConfig struct {

Reviewer: if this type is only going to have optional fields, we should add a minimum properties constraint of 1 to ensure that something like `gatewayAPI: {}` is not a valid input. If you are configuring the `gatewayAPI` field you need to specify an opinion.

	// managementMode specifies how the Cluster Ingress
	// Operator manages Gateway API Custom Resource Definitions
	// (CRDs), the OpenShift Gateway API implementation, and its
	// Gateway API controllers.
	//
	// When set to "Managed" (the default), the ingress operator
	// installs, owns, and upgrades the Gateway API CRDs, protects
	// them with a Validating Admission Policy, and deploys the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation and its Gateway API
	// controllers. This is the only fully supported configuration.
	//
	// When set to "Unmanaged", the ingress operator does not
	// install or manage Gateway API CRDs and does not deploy the
	// OpenShift Gateway API implementation or its Gateway API
	// controllers. The cluster administrator or a third-party
	// product is responsible for providing their own CRDs and
	// Gateway controller.
	//
	// +kubebuilder:default:="Managed"

> 	// +default="Managed"

Reviewer: Just to verify, is this the same as the default behavior today before this API is introduced? 

 When an upgrade occurs, this defaulting to "Managed" shouldn't result in any breaking changes to an end-users configuration.

Reviewer: Also worth noting that for configuration APIs, we generally try to avoid setting defaults like this because it contractually locks us into that default forever.

Instead we prefer to have omission of a configuration indicate that an end-user has no opinion and that the platform should choose a reasonable default that is subject to change without notice.

In this case I'd recommend following that no-opinion pattern. If you follow this, I think we end up in the case where the parent `gatewayAPI` field would need to be optional as well.

Author: right, I think it is fine. On the operator we will consider:
* empty == no opinion == Managed
* something == Respect the admin requirement

Let me fix it here, and I will also pass the golangci-lint on the current mock API to avoid the back and forwards with tags
